1591, July 24. 

Instructions ^ for Sir Henry Unton, Knight, ordered 

and sent to be the Queene's Ambassador with the 

ELIZABETH R. French Kinge to whom her Majes'"'' hath written her 

letters of credence with the said Sir Henry Unton, 

which he shall at his first accesse present to the Kinge, 

dated the xxiiij"" of July, 1591. 

The authoritie which you shall have to be our ambassador to the French 

Kinge shall be warranted by our speciall letters unto the Kinge, signifiinge that 

we have made speciall choise of you to have that place ; and requiringe the 

Kinge to credit you in all such thinges as you shall by our commandement, or 

in our name propounde, declare, or require ; as he would give credit to our 

seLfe. And therfore we doubte not but you wUl advisedly consider at all 

tymes by your wisdome, gravitie and temperance, to order aU your actions, 

not only in your accesses and speches with the Kinge, but also have good 

regarde in all other your behavioiu's and conversations with all persons, to 

preserve the estimacion of us and our royal dignitie, as our ambassador, and, 

in a certain manner, representinge our person. 

For the first and principall pointe of your charge, you shall in noe one 
thinge better performe your dutie and uphold your reputacon, then in ob- 
servinge of the rites of religion, and in service of God to foUowe the forme of 
Common Dailey Prayers, bothe by your selfe and houshold, accordinge to the 
Church of England, as it is established by lawe ; wherby you may appeare 
abroade to be a dutiful subjecte to the lawes of your naturall coun trey, without 
impugninge or contendinge with the rites and usages of the Church of France, 

as matters not aperteyninge to your charge. And yett if you shall have 
cause to be with the Kinge at any time when he shalbe att any service/ you 
shall not refuse to attende uppon him. 

You shall also have regard to mainteine the dignitie of us and our crowne 
in aU assembhes and proceedinges for your place and precedencie, as in right 
to geive place to noe other princes' ambassadors, but to the emperor's, for in 
truthe none ells but a French Kinge out to have place before us. 

Item, you shall seeke to acquainte your selfe with the ambassadors of 
Venice and of the duke of Florence, whose superiors and lords do professe 
good friendshippe towards us ; and by them you shall come to intelligencies 
of the affaires of Itallye, as of the Pope's and the Kinge of Spaine's, and ther 
confederates, and you shall use to acquainte them with aU good occurrences 
which you shall receive of our proceadinges ; and, as you shall see cause, to 
satisfye them also with the truthe of our actions, contrary unto the untreue 
slanders of our enemies and rebells. 

If any shall come to the French Kinge from the Kinge of Scottes, the Kinge 
of Denmarke, or from any of the Protestant Princes of the Empire, or from 
the Protestant Cantons, you shall by your conferences with them let them 
severally understand how freindly we doe make accounte of their superiors 
and lordes. 

You shall have good regarde to aU negotiacions that male be under hande 
attempted to make accorde or abstinences of warres betwixte France and 
Spayne. 

You shall receive informacion by our Treasurer of England, as one ac- 
quainted there with, of the principall pointes of such treaties and leagues for 
amitie as are extant betweene us and that crowne, and also for entercourse and 
traffique betweene our subjects for marchandise ; ^ and you shall endeavour 
your selfe to see the same duely observed, and at all tymes to procure that 
our subjectes male enjoye their trade with out oppression by any innovacion 
of taxes contrary to former usage. And if you shall heare of any complaintes 
of the Frenche Kinges subjectes for any wronges or prises committed by any 
our subjectes, you shall offer to enforme us or our Counsell therof, and so 
procure them justice with favor and expedition. 

You shall also be informed by our said Treasurer what greate sommes of 
money and what municions we have, by waie of imprestinge, yealded to the 


saide Kinge since he came to the crowne, and how the same is dewe to us i so 
as when you shall have occasion offered to speake thereof, you may with 
certeinty declare the truth therof, and geive cause for the French Kinge and 
his counsell to acknowledge the greatness of our friendshipp, having without 
respecte of our oune estate yealded him such aides as never any King hath 
done the like to any other. And yett you shall not move this by way of 
expostulacon, or to move any unkindness therby, by the remembrance of our 
benefittes. And you shall also be enformed of certeine articles of covenants 
lately made by the Kinges ambassador, by authoritie of the Kinges comission, 
howe we shalbe reemboursed the saide sommes. 

You shall also consider what speciall service you may doe to us in havinge 
regard to the actions of our cosen the earle of Essex, our heutennant generall 
of our forces, givinge him understandinge from tyme to tyme, what judgement 
is had of his actions, approvinge to him such as are good, and such as you 
shall knowe or heare to be commended ; and informing him of such thinges 
as you shall understand to be contrary, givinge him good advice to reforme 
the same ; and in soe doinge you shall please us, and therby performe the 
duty of a good servante and the office of a pubUcke minister, being ther as 
our ambassador ; and in truthe you shall give him cause to love you, though 
hapelie comonly younge noblemen at the first doe not imbrace advertisements 
of thinges to be reformed. But we charge you uppon your duty, not for any 
such respecte to forbeare to deale plainly in honorable sorte with the saide 
earle. 

You shall use all good diUgence to understande in what places of France 
any of our subjectes, beinge rebelles or fugitives, shall remaine ; and procure 
to the best of your power that they may be by the Kinges meanes taken ; and 
specially uppon the takinge of any towne by the Kinge, wherin any English- 
men shalbe founde, earnestly to require them to be taken, if they be rebells or 
fugitives. Or if they shalbe founde to have been taken prisoners in those 
townes, and not to have passed out of our realme as fugitives, you shall also 
procure their deUvery, and of your doings herin to give advertisement. 

Item, after you have anie good knowledge of such of the Kinges counseU, 
or of any other men of quality serving the King, whom you shall understand 
to be wise and well affected in religion, you shaU require of them wherin you 
may further the cause of reUgion by dealinge with the French Kinge ; for that 

we are enformed that thoughe the Kinge hathe taken manie townes and places 
of charge from his rebells, yett the matter is so handled by the Catholickes as 
few or none of such as have been dutiftiU servantes to the King of longe tyme, 
and are knowen to be of the religion, are placed in any of those places, wherby 
the Kinge can be so sure of the said places, and yett his most trustie servantes 
comforted or releived. And if you shall find this to be treue, uppon confe- 
rence with persons of understandinge, you shall take convenient tyme to imparte 
this to the Kinge, as so directed bi us, and earnestly move him to remedie 
this ; wherin you shaU doe weU, and soe deale as the counsellors professinge 
the Catholicke relligion male understand your doinges therin. 

For your first accesse to the Kinge, consideringe we have no minister of 
our's to procure your audience and to present you to the Kinge, you shall 
have letters from the French ambassadour here resident, either to the Kinge 
him selfe, or to some of the principaU. of his counsell to procure for you 
bothe accesse and audience, and for your continewance their afterwardes to 
have audience, Sir Edward Stafford ^ shall enforme you howe he was accus- 
tomed to doe.

W. BUBGHLEY.
