1591, July 24. 

Instructions ^ for Sir Henry Unton, Knight, ordered 

and sent to be the Queene's Ambassador with the 

ELIZABETH R. French Kinge to whom her Majes'"'' hath written her 

letters of credence with the said Sir Henry Unton, 

which he shall at his first accesse present to the Kinge, 

dated the xxiiij"" of July, 1591. 

The authoritie which you shall have to be our ambassador to the French 

Kinge shall be warranted by our speciall letters unto the Kinge, signifiinge that 

we have made speciall choise of you to have that place ; and requiringe the 

Kinge to credit you in all such thinges as you shall by our commandement, or 

in our name propounde, declare, or require ; as he would give credit to our 

seLfe. And therfore we doubte not but you wUl advisedly consider at all 

tymes by your wisdome, gravitie and temperance, to order aU your actions, 

not only in your accesses and speches with the Kinge, but also have good 

regarde in all other your behavioiu's and conversations with all persons, to 

preserve the estimacion of us and our royal dignitie, as our ambassador, and, 

in a certain manner, representinge our person. 

For the first and principall pointe of your charge, you shall in noe one 
thinge better performe your dutie and uphold your reputacon, then in ob- 
servinge of the rites of religion, and in service of God to foUowe the forme of 
Common Dailey Prayers, bothe by your selfe and houshold, accordinge to the 
Church of England, as it is established by lawe ; wherby you may appeare 
abroade to be a dutiful subjecte to the lawes of your naturall coun trey, without 
impugninge or contendinge with the rites and usages of the Church of France, 

' The original instructions signed by Lord Burghley are in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 194. 
Another copy is in the same volume, fol. 69, and n third in the State Paper OflBce. See Rymer's 
Feed. xvi. 103. Sir Henry's allowance was fixed at £4 6 8 per diem. 

B 



2 [July, 

as matters not aperteyninge to your charge. And yett if you shall have 
cause to be with the Kinge at any time when he shalbe att any service/ you 
shall not refuse to attende uppon him. 

You shall also have regard to mainteine the dignitie of us and our crowne 
in aU assembhes and proceedinges for your place and precedencie, as in right 
to geive place to noe other princes' ambassadors, but to the emperor's, for in 
truthe none ells but a French Kinge out to have place before us. 

Item, you shall seeke to acquainte your selfe with the ambassadors of 
Venice and of the duke of Florence, whose superiors and lords do professe 
good friendshippe towards us ; and by them you shall come to intelligencies 
of the affaires of Itallye, as of the Pope's and the Kinge of Spaine's, and ther 
confederates, and you shall use to acquainte them with aU good occurrences 
which you shall receive of our proceadinges ; and, as you shall see cause, to 
satisfye them also with the truthe of our actions, contrary unto the untreue 
slanders of our enemies and rebells. 

If any shall come to the French Kinge from the Kinge of Scottes, the Kinge 
of Denmarke, or from any of the Protestant Princes of the Empire, or from 
the Protestant Cantons, you shall by your conferences with them let them 
severally understand how freindly we doe make accounte of their superiors 
and lordes. 

You shall have good regarde to aU negotiacions that male be under hande 
attempted to make accorde or abstinences of warres betwixte France and 
Spayne. 

You shall receive informacion by our Treasurer of England, as one ac- 
quainted there with, of the principall pointes of such treaties and leagues for 
amitie as are extant betweene us and that crowne, and also for entercourse and 
traffique betweene our subjects for marchandise ; ^ and you shall endeavour 
your selfe to see the same duely observed, and at all tymes to procure that 
our subjectes male enjoye their trade with out oppression by any innovacion 
of taxes contrary to former usage. And if you shall heare of any complaintes 
of the Frenche Kinges subjectes for any wronges or prises committed by any 
our subjectes, you shall offer to enforme us or our Counsell therof, and so 
procure them justice with favor and expedition. 

You shall also be informed by our said Treasurer what greate sommes of 
money and what municions we have, by waie of imprestinge, yealded to the 

' Sermon, Rymer. ^ See the document appended to thjs letter, p. 4. 



A. D. 1591.] 3 

saide Kinge since he came to the crowne, and how the same is dewe to us i so 
as when you shall have occasion offered to speake thereof, you may with 
certeinty declare the truth therof, and geive cause for the French Kinge and 
his counsell to acknowledge the greatness of our friendshipp, having without 
respecte of our oune estate yealded him such aides as never any King hath 
done the like to any other. And yett you shall not move this by way of 
expostulacon, or to move any unkindness therby, by the remembrance of our 
benefittes. And you shall also be enformed of certeine articles of covenants 
lately made by the Kinges ambassador, by authoritie of the Kinges comission, 
howe we shalbe reemboursed the saide sommes. 

You shall also consider what speciall service you may doe to us in havinge 
regard to the actions of our cosen the earle of Essex, our heutennant generall 
of our forces, givinge him understandinge from tyme to tyme, what judgement 
is had of his actions, approvinge to him such as are good, and such as you 
shall knowe or heare to be commended ; and informing him of such thinges 
as you shall understand to be contrary, givinge him good advice to reforme 
the same ; and in soe doinge you shall please us, and therby performe the 
duty of a good servante and the office of a pubUcke minister, being ther as 
our ambassador ; and in truthe you shall give him cause to love you, though 
hapelie comonly younge noblemen at the first doe not imbrace advertisements 
of thinges to be reformed. But we charge you uppon your duty, not for any 
such respecte to forbeare to deale plainly in honorable sorte with the saide 
earle. 

You shall use all good diUgence to understande in what places of France 
any of our subjectes, beinge rebelles or fugitives, shall remaine ; and procure 
to the best of your power that they may be by the Kinges meanes taken ; and 
specially uppon the takinge of any towne by the Kinge, wherin any English- 
men shalbe founde, earnestly to require them to be taken, if they be rebells or 
fugitives. Or if they shalbe founde to have been taken prisoners in those 
townes, and not to have passed out of our realme as fugitives, you shall also 
procure their deUvery, and of your doings herin to give advertisement. 

Item, after you have anie good knowledge of such of the Kinges counseU, 
or of any other men of quality serving the King, whom you shall understand 
to be wise and well affected in religion, you shaU require of them wherin you 
may further the cause of reUgion by dealinge with the French Kinge ; for that 

' See the document printed, p. 6. 



4 [July, 

we are enformed that thoughe the Kinge hathe taken manie townes and places 
of charge from his rebells, yett the matter is so handled by the Catholickes as 
few or none of such as have been dutiftiU servantes to the King of longe tyme, 
and are knowen to be of the religion, are placed in any of those places, wherby 
the Kinge can be so sure of the said places, and yett his most trustie servantes 
comforted or releived. And if you shall find this to be treue, uppon confe- 
rence with persons of understandinge, you shall take convenient tyme to imparte 
this to the Kinge, as so directed bi us, and earnestly move him to remedie 
this ; wherin you shaU doe weU, and soe deale as the counsellors professinge 
the Catholicke relligion male understand your doinges therin. 

For your first accesse to the Kinge, consideringe we have no minister of 
our's to procure your audience and to present you to the Kinge, you shall 
have letters from the French ambassadour here resident, either to the Kinge 
him selfe, or to some of the principaU. of his counsell to procure for you 
bothe accesse and audience, and for your continewance their afterwardes to 
have audience, Sir Edward Stafford ^ shall enforme you howe he was accus- 
tomed to doe.2 

W. BUBGHLBY. * 



" Coppie of certein articles of treaties with Fraunce."* 

Touchinge reprisalls. 

„ . ^ . -•&gt; Item, conventum est et conclusum, quod de 

Tracf. Trecensis, 1564, ) ^ • ,. , . . i, • 

Vneutnus prsedictorum prmcipum canceUana seu 

-' alia curia in posterum concedentur aliquse litterae 

reprisalium, marcse aut contra-marcae, nisi super et contra principales delin- 

' The Queen's late ambassador lieger in France. Stafford's allowance was £3 6 S per diem. 

^ Besides these instructions, Unton was furnished with credentials to the French Idng, which are 
printed in Rymer, xvi. 105. 

3 There might perhaps be some uncertainty as to the date of these Instructions had we not the 
original, in which they are ascribed to the 24 July. The Bodl. copy refers them first to the 13 and 
then to the 23 of July : the date is left blank in the S. P. O. copy, and the Cottonian copy omits the 
date entirely. 

' Copy in Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii, fol. 137, signed by Burghley. 



A. D. 1591.J 5 

quentes, aut eorum bona, eonimve factores, et hoc in casu manifestae denega- 
tionis justitiae, ut per litteras summonitionis aut requisitionis, et prout de jure 
requiritur, sufficienter constabit. 



For avoidinge of depredacions. 

1 Conventum etiam est pro libero intercessu mer- 

Artic. 7- eiusdem. r • . . , ■ ... , , 

■' J cium et mercatorum utnusque pnncipis, quod du- 

rante pace praedicta, nulla navis armata et ad bellum seu ad guerram parata 
et instructa egredietur, seu egredi permittetur, portus maritimos regnorum 
Anglise et Franciae, nisi prius satisdederit et cautionem qualem potent praes- 
titerit in manibus Admiralis Angliae seu ejus locum tenentis, aut custu- 
mariorum praedictorum portuum, quoad naves Angliae ; aut in manibus Admyrali 
Franciae, seu ejus locum tenentis seu alterius judicis ordinarii illius loci, 
quoad naves Franciae ; de non invadendo, molestando, depredando seu ofFen- 
dendo subditos utriusque principis, aut eorum alterius, nee eorum alligatos, 
nee eis injuriam aliquam inferendo, sub poena publicationis navium, punitionis 
corporis, cum restitutione omnium bonorum et damnorum quibuscunque 
illatorum. 



Touchinge the certaine rate of Customes. 

Item, conventum est quod theolonia, vectigalia, portatoria et alia jura cujus- 
cunque nominis fuerint, sint certa et recognita pro quoque genere mercium ; 
et ilia in membrana scripta authentice,i regioque sigillo munita, tradentur 
praefatae reginae, aut ejus legato penes dictum regem commoranti, ut mercatorum 
gubernatori tradatur illud scriptum pro testimonio concordise perpetuce ; 
quodque ilia onera neque augere nee alia nova imponere super mercatores, aut 
mercimonia Anglica quocunque quaesito colore directe aut indirecte, regi aut 
successoribus suis ullo unquam tempore licebit. 

W. BuRGHLEY. 

'MS. authentic^. 



[July, 



II. 

8 Sept. 1589. " A NOTE OF THE FrENCH KiNGES DEBT TO HeB MaJESTY."' 

First by bond of Messietirs Beauvoir de Bhuy ^ 
and Buzenvall^ for repaiement of xx.Mi. sterling xx.^li. ccciij.'''' iij.li. 



xvij. 



s. 



74 613^ 
Twentie lastes of powder vaUued at ij.™li., 3000 
bullettes esteemed at cccciiij."'' iij.li. xvij.s. ster. 

This somme was to have ben answered at 
one yeares end, and ought to have bene 
satisfied in September, 1590. 

30 Oct. 1589. A like obligacion of monsieur Beauvoir and De 
Fresnes* for xv.^l. vij.'^. 1. 1. sterlinge, lent only for 
sixe monethes, and was due the 30th of Aprill, 
1590 xv." vij.c. l.li. 

52500.^ 



24 May, 1590. A bonde of monsieur de Beauvoir and Saldagnie 
for 2100li. borrowed of the Lord Major Sir John 
Harte, and others 210011. 



7000^ 



This somme was lent only for sixe monethes, 
and was due the 24th of November last, but 
was contynued for sixe monethes more, which 
ended the 24th of Maye laste. 

25 Sept. 1590. A. bonde of Monsieur Beauvoir for the somme of 
10,000 li. lent for ix monethes, and was due the 25th 
of June last 1 0,000 h. 



33333 ^ 20 ss. 



Summe 502331. 17 s. 
167446 A 20 ss. 



' A copy in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 407. Other copies in French are found in the 
same volume, ff. 453 and 474. See also Rymer's Feed. xvi. p. 88. 
' Jean de la Fin, Seigneur de Beauvoir-la-Nocle de Buhy. 
^ Paul Choart, Seigneur de Busenval. * Philippe de Canaye, Seigneur de Fresne. 



A. D. 1591.] 



Her Majesties charge for the forces in Brittaigne beinge 3000 : 
and in Normande 4000. 



^ The levy, coate, conduct and transportacion, and 
other extraordinary charges of the 3000 souldiers 
sent into Bryttaynnie under the charge of Sir John 
Norrys, by estymacion 



Extraordinary ^ 
Charge, 



2163 li. 10 s . 

6958 A 



Besides the charge of 4 pieces of greate ordi- 
nances, viz. 2 demy cannons and 2 whole cul- 
veringes, vdth 4 lastes of powder and carriages, and 
all other thinges belonginge to the same, vallued at 



1 384 h. 13 s. 4d. 
4614^ 



The levy, coate, conducte, transportacon, etc. 
of the 4000 sent under the charge of the earle of 
Essex, therin comprised the 100 horse insteed of 250 
foote by estimacion 2804h. 9s. 4d. 



9371'i4ss. 



These entered into 
paie aboute the 
10th of Aprill. 
1590. 



600 of these en- 
tered into pay the 
24th of June and 
the reste the 24th 
of July. 



Summ besides the chardge of the 
transportacon backe again of the saide 
forces not here estimated 

7362h. I7s. 8d. 
20938A 40ss. 



The monethly charge of the 3000 in Brittanye 
with the Generall and Principall officers wages and 
enterteinements 



The like monethly charge for those in Nor- 
mandie nowe sent with the Earle of Essex ; and 
those 600 already there with Sir Roger Williams 



3575li. 17s. 
11918^ 40ss. 



449011. 
14967 A 



8 [July, 

It is to be considered that the Generalls enter- 
taynement is not here sett downe. 

Summ of the saide monethly pay, besides 
the entertainement of the Earle of Essex 8065U. 12s. 



26885 A 40ss. 



III. 

Articles accordes par messieurs de Beauvoir et de Reaux, 
1591, mynistres du roy Tres Chrestien, et messieurs le Grand 

25 June. Tresorier et admyrall d'Angleterre, et monser le Cham- 
beUan.i 

Premierement, ils ont promis, pour et au nom du diet seigneur roy, que 
s'il plaira a la majestic de la Royne d'envoyer en Normandie trois mil quatre 
cents 2 soldats, pour, avec les six cents qui y sont a present soubs la conduitte 
du Sieur Roger Williams, accomplir le noumbre de quatre mil, ou, en lieu de 
deux centes cinquante des diets quatre miU, une comette de cavalrie de cent 
chevaulx, le diet roy sera tenu, en la meilleure forme dont on se pourra 
adviser, de paier entirement touts les cousts qui ont este ou seront faicts 
pour la levee, equipage, transportacion, et sovdde ordinaire des diets soldats, y 
comprennant le capitaine generalle qui aura comandement sur iceaux, et 
touts aultres officiers accoustomes, selon qu'il est porte en une cedule souscrite 
pour les diets ambassadeurs, et les signeurs par dessus mentionnes. 

Item, pour mieulx asseurer le paiement tant des fraix contenus en la dicte 
cedule, pour le regard des dictes quatre mil hommes, ou trois mil sept cents 
cinquante gens de pied et une comette de lanciers, (ainsi qu'il est contenu au 
premier article,) quil fault presentement envoyer, come aussy pour les aultres 
trois mil emploiez en Bretaigne soubs le Sieur Jehan Norrys,^ et pour touts 

1 Oeig. S. p. O. with marginal notes in Burghley's hand. Copy, Cott. MS. fol. 212. See Rymer's 
Feed, xvi., 102. 

2 In the original for 4000 into Norm. 
2 Norreie, Orig. 



A. D. 1591.J 9 

aultres sommes d'argent, munitions, pouldres et aultres despenses que monsr. 
de Beauvoir de Buhy, et Buzenvall au mois de Septembre 1589,i et quaussy 
messieurs de Beauvoir et de Saldaigne au mois de May 1590,^ et que monsieur 
de Beauvoir tout seul in Sept&amp;nibre 1590,' estoient pour eux, et pour le roy a* 
fair restituer, come par leurs obligations particulieres, datees ainsy que desus, 
clairement il se void : Or maintenant le diet monsieur de Beauvoir suivant 
Fauthoritie quil a de par le roy s'obligera seymesme, et ses heirs, le phis 
seurement que faire se poura, que le diet roy accordera a sa majestic, ses heirs 
et successeurs, par un escript autentiguement sele du grand seau de Fraunce, 
avant la descente ^ en Normandie de ses dictes troupes, que sa majestic et ses 
commis receuront et cueilleront tout le profitt de touts sortes des tailles, taxes, 
coustumes, et droicts, qui porront rensir du dedans et des invirons de la ville 
de Roan^ et du Havre de Grace, par le noms des impositions, et domaine 
forraine, et des gabeUes des sels, et par le nom des quatriesmes des vins, ou 
alcunes aulteres choses, ou d'aultres impositions, appeUes les nouvellcs im- 
positions, pour I'entree des merchandises ; Toutes lesquelles comodities, (par 
quelque nom, ou noms qu'eUes ayent este par cydevant ou sont maintenant 
appellees,) sa Majestic par ses Commis poura librcment et reaUement recep- 
voir, et les transporter franchement par deca, soit en deniers ou denrees, 
scion qu'il luy sera le plus agreablc jusques a cc que par le moycn de ses 
comodites ainsy reccucs, cUe soit entierement payee et satisfaicte de toutes les 
sommes d'argent desia emploies, et d'aultres dcspences, tant du temps passec 
que de celuy a venir, pour lesquelles le diet monsieur de Beauvoir et les aultres 
sur mentiones, et iceluy aussi tout seul sont obliges, comme diet est. 

Item, fault entendre que sa Majestic et ses commis commenceront a recevoir 
les diet comodites dans la diet ville de Rouen, ou Havre de Grace tout aussy 
tost que Tunc ou I'autre sera reduict en I'obeissance du roy. 

Item, le diet seigneur accordera a sa Majestic ne permettre point aulcune 
des impositions, gabelles, quatriesmes, profitts, et droits, estre diminuee ou 
augmentee, sans I'advis et conscntemente diceUe, ny ne fera pas, ny soufrira 
quaulcuns des diet profits et droicts soient destines a estre payes ou payes 
en alcun aultre lieu dans le port du diet Havre de Grace, ou dedans icellc 
riviere, qui auroient este, ou doibvent estre payes en la diet ville et cite de 
Rouen et la viUe et porte de Havre de Grace. 

• 7bre 1589. - May 1590. ^ ybre 1590. ■• de, in orig. 

' Y' k, obligat' to be delyvered before y"^ descent of y" army. ' Rouen, in orig. 

C 



10 [July, 

Item, s'y aulcuns des diets droits aura este ou sera mis a louage a aulcune 
personne, pour quelque revenue anuell, ou pour certaines sommes dargent, sa 
Majestie pourra recevoir les diets revenus, ainsy payables per les fermiers de la 
mesme facon, qu'ilz la payent par les mains des officiers ou recepveurs du roy. 

Item, le diet roy aeeordera (comme diet est) qu'au bout de deux^ mois depuis 
I'arrivee desdicts trois mil quatre cents soldats, en aleune partie de la Franee, 
les dits nombres serront paies par ieeluy a la fin de ehasque semaine, ou de 
chasque mois, ou quil leur sera loisible de fair leur retour de partir librement de 
quelque porte que luy appartient, avec I'aide de ses vaisseaux, sans quonface 
arrester auleune partie des diets nombres, si non en tant que sa Majestie le 
trouve agreable. 

Finalement, le diet monsieur de Beauvoir accorde et promette qu'il sera 
oblige pour soy mesme, soudain qu'on aura signe ees articles et procurera 
aussy que le roy s'obligera en la meiUieure forme qu'un roy se puisse obliger, 
avec I'emologation de la court de Parlement et supresme ratification de la 
Chambre des Comptes scant a Tours, a fin de ratifier entierement touts ces 
articles pour la deue satisfaction de sa Majestie touchant toutes les sommes 
dargent et aultres despences desus mentiones. 

Escript a Greenewich, ce xxv jour de Juin, 1591. 
Signe 
Jehan de la Fine, AEmorett S'' de Reaux. 



IV. 

1591, 

21 July. Her Majesties pasport; dated the 22tli2 of July, 1591. 

ELIZABETH R. 

Wheras we have appointed our trusty and well beloved servant Sir Henry 
Unton, knight, to make his repaire into Franee, ther to be oure Ambassador 
resident, with our good brother the French Kinge ; We straightly chardge 
and command you, and any of you, not only to suffer him with his companie 
and traine, and all their horses or geldinges, moneye, juells, plate, males, 

1 The Q. ch. shuld be but for 2 monthes. 

'^ So dated in the heading of the Bodl. MS., but probably incorrectly, since the document itself 
and the marginal note ascribe it to the 2 1st of July. 



A. D, 1591.J 11 

cofers, bagges, and baggages, and all his necessary and household provisions 
and furniture whatsoever, at all tymes quietly to passe by you without any 
manner of stay, lett, or interruption ; But also that all you, and every of you, 
see him and his saide trayne furnished from place to place to the sea side both 
of sufficiente and able horses, and of any other carriages also, which he may 
need, at reasonable prises. And further, that ye be also aydinge and assist- 
inge unto the said Sir Henry Unton for providinge him of convenient ship- 
pinge for the suer and saffe transportation of himself ^ and his trayne, and this 
likewise at prisses reasonably ; not fayling herof, as you tender our displeasure, 
and will answer the contrary at your perill. And this our letters shalbe your 
sufiBcient warrant and dischardge in this behalfe. 

Geven under our signett, at our mannour of Greenwiche, the xxj*. of July, 
in the xxxiii year of your raigne. 

To all Justices, Mayours, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, 
Cunstables, Customers, Controlers and Searchers ; 
And to all thos our ofl&amp;cers, ministers, and sub- 
jects, to whom in this case it may appertaine ; 
and to every of them." ^ 

Ed. Lake. 



V. 

I59I, 

25 July. " The Note of Indenture of the Queenes plate deliverd 
to my Lo. owte of the Juells House." ^ 

This Indenture made xxv**". day of July a", xxxiij". regine Elizabethe, 
wittnesseth that John Astely, Esquior, master and Threasurer of her Ma- 
jesties Juells and plate, hath delivered imto Sir Henry Unton, knight, leiger 
ambassador sent mto France, thes parcells of silver vessells followinge 

First, two greate platters po3. iiij."vj.oz. "^^qz. 

' Of his trajTie, Bodl. MS. 

" In S. P. O. is a " Warrant for the Transportation of the E. of Essex provisions," dated 21 July, 
33 Eliz. 
' The original Indenture is preserved, Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 216. 



12 [July, 

Item, fower demy platters po}. cxix.oz. iij.grs. 

Item, six lesser platters P03. cxlj.oz. qrter. 

Item, eight dishes po}. cxviij.oz. 

Item, nyne demy dishes poj. cx.oz. 

Item, six lesser dishes P03. Iviij.oz. x.q'ters. 
Item, one bassin, an ewer of silver white, P03. lij.oz. dd, q''ters. 

Item, six sawcers P03. xxix.oz. 

In wittness wherof the parties above said have to these 
present Indentures interchangably sett ther handes, the 
day and yeare above written. 

Test. N. Pigeon. 

Subsc. 

J. AsTEIiEY.l 



VI. 

1591, 

27 July. " From the Lord Treasurer to me at Dover." 2 

My Lord Ambassadour. As tyme groweth on, so dothe matters fall out, 
wherof to give you advertisement. 

You are to understand that when the Queenes Majestie assented to send 
Sir John Norris with 3000 men into Brittaigne, it was promised on the 
French Kinges parte by his Ambassador here that the Kinges forces there 
should be made double to ours, for otherwise her Majesties powers had not 
gone thither as auxiUirie ; but it hath been seen nowe that the French Kinges 
powers have not in number much exceeded ours. And the French that be 
rebells and the Spaniards are found to be double as both ; so as except the 
French King shall send more supplies of his own forces, her Majestie may not 
endure to have hers to continewe there. And for the profe of the lacke of 
performance of them which was promised, her Majestie is advertised by Sir 

1 The same Cottonian MS. also contains a copy of the Queen's warrant for the delivery of the same 
plate, dated at Greenwich, 21 July, 1591. 
' Copy S. P. 0. Some extracts from this letter occur in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 131. 



A. D. 1591.] 13 

John Norris that the state of the armye in Brettaigne was, the 13 of Julye, 
as followeth. 

The Normans are all gone awaie both horse and foote. The CoUineU of 
the Brettaignes gone also with his troupes disbanded, saving cxx*"^. harque- 
busiers a-foote, so as there is no other force lefte of the infantrie. For the 
cavallarie ; Monsieur de Humadie hath but fortie horse. The marquis of As- 
serack but twentie ; The marquis of Coaquine but twentie ; Monsieur Mont- 
gomerie fortie ; Monsieur de Cargomarke fortie ; Monsieur de Liscouett 
thirtie ; and of two hundred light horses are lefte but thirtie and the EngUshe 
horse ar 70, so in all the cavallarie is but about 300 horse, and the leaders of 
the French horse likely to goe away to their harveste. 

This is the estate of the army of France, wherunto our army of 3000 are 
to trust; wherin in reason ours ar but auxillarie, we ar almoste 1000 for 
every their 100, contrary to all reason, and especially to the promise made. 
And wher as Monsieur La Verdin* was saide should come with 1000 or 1500, 
neither he nor anie man was come the 13 of July, but by a reporte looked for 
to come only with foure or five hundred footemen, and these not hkely to 
tarrye above two monethes. 

This you are, by your Majesties commandement, to deliver to the Kinge 
and to the Marshall of Biron after your first audience, and not otherwise, be- 
cause you shall not be ungrateful at the first. And your conclusion shalbe 
with the Kinge, to let him know that excepte these defaultes be otherwise 
supplied, her Majestic cannot with her honor and contentation of her people 
suflFer Sir John Norrys to tarry any longer ; and therfore she hath given him 
in charge that if he shall not finde any further reliefe, he shall reteire himself 
with the nombers home agsiine into England ; wherwith her Majestic trusteth 
the French cannot be offended. And you shall presse the Kinge to under- 
stand his good answeare here unto, wheruppon bothe her Majestie may know 
what to determyn uppon, and what Sir John Norrys male expecte. And for 
that purpose you shall bothe with speed retume the French Kinges answer to 
her Majestie and doe what you can to sende the same to Sir John Norrys. 
And because there may be some intelligence betwene you and Sir John 
Norrys, I do send you a coppie of the alphabet ^ betwixte him and me, which 
you male keepe and write unto him in the same any thinge you would have 
obscurely delivered. If you shalll finde that the French Kinges confirmation 

' Jean de Beaumanoir de Lavardin. - See the cypher on p. 14. 



] 4 [July, 

of the late accords betwixte his arabassadour and us here, which Monsieur de 
Reaulx had charge to procure speedUie, be not sente from hence, you shall by 
your letters to Grimston, or by some other meanes, before your accesse to 
the Kinge, soUicite the expedicion therof ; for untill it shall either be come to 
Deepe or brought into England, the earle shall not march with his army into 
the lande, which wUbe very inconvenient for all parties. And therfore, I 
praye you, take some good care therof, and enforme Monsieur Inglefield, 
otherwise called Soldaigne i ther, who as a good counsellor to the Kinge, will, 
I am sure, hasten the matter. And so havinge noe leasure to write you any 
more I wish you aU good successe. 

I wish 2 you better successe than your good frend Sir Ro. Cecill as yet 
findeth here, although I knowe your best fi-end slackeneth not his speache 
and soUicitations. From the Courte at Greenwich, the 27th of July, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freinde. 
To the right honorable Sir Henry Unton, 

Knight, Ambassador for the Queenes Majestic William Burghleighe. 

of England, with the French Kinge. 



1591, 






25 July. 


"The Cypher." 3 


abcdefgh ikl 


m 


no pqr s sttvwxy 


1 3478956abc 


h 


ik d ef 1 mn&amp;b ce 


] ij. iiij. Tj. viij. 
Nihil aignificantia [ 






XIJ. XUIJ. XV. 


The Queene of England 




Emanuel 


Emperor 




Balthesar 


French King 




Vespasian 


King of Spayne 




Bersa" 


King of Scottes 




Cipiriaritus 


Cardinall of Bourbon 




Eptrod 


P. Conty 




Gabatha 


Comte Soyssons' 




Haran 



' Sauldame, S. P. 0. See also No. xiii. p. 22. 
^ This concluding sentence does not occur in the Bodl. MS. 

2 Two copies of this cypher appear in the S. P. O., and various other cyphers used apparently in the 
same negociations are found in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. ff. 218, and 224. 
^ Originally Bennoni, but altered to Bersa in S. P. 0. by Lord Burghley. * Goyssons, Bodl. 



A. D, 1591. J 


1 


5 




Marshall Byron 




Epaminundas 




Due Montpensier 




Amintas 




P. D'Ombes 




Teucer 




D. Longueville 




Philande 




Viscounte Turreine 




Ascanius 




Ambassadour Sir Henry Unton 


Adamus 




Ambassadour in England 




Saphirus 




Lord Chancellor 




Mecaenas 




Lord Threasurer 




Aurelius 




E. of Essex 




Cyrus 




Duke of Parma 




Almodius 




Duke of Mayne 




Achitophel 




D. Mercury 




Balladan. 




England 


100 


Corapte Maurice 


23 


Fraunce 


200 


Portsmorthe 


51 


Spayne 


50 


Rye 


52 


Lowcontries 


20 


He of Wighte 


54 


Holland 


22 


Dover 


55. 


Brittaigne 




AVorcester 




Normandie 




Lecester 




Paris 




Shrewsbury 




Rouen 




Checester 




Xewhaven 




Lancaster 




Deip 




Bristol 




BuUen 




Worcester 




Callis 




Oxforde. 





1591, 
28 July. 



VII. 



" To the Lord Threasurer in answeare of the above written." ' 



Right honorable, my verie good Lord. By your Lordship's letters of the 
27th hereof I have receaved her Majestie's gracious pleasure, and your Lord- 
ship's grave direction for my proceedinge with the French Kinge in the matter 
of Brittaigne, as also for the procureinge a present dispatche of the con- 
firmation of the late accorde which Monsieur de Reaux had charge, and did 
accordinglie imdertake speedehe to send. In both which I will dutifully obey 
her Majestie's commandement, and with ail care and dilligence serioushe observe 
your Lordship's orders with imediate retoume of answear, if the winde give me 

' Orig. S. p. O. 



16 [August, 

leave, which is altogether as yett contrary, and whereuppon we doe now only 
attende. 

The cipher your Lordship sent me inclosed in your letter for my better 
intelligence with Sir John Norrys, I have receaved, which was very necessary, 
and shal be accordingly used. 

Your Lordship's honorable disposicion and goodness &gt; towardes me, wherof 
I have goode profe, doth give me noe small comeforte and incouragement, the 
continewance whereof I humbUe crave, as the only trewe almynacke of my 
never endynge good.^ 

The noe better successe as yet of my honorable good friend. Sir Robert 
Cecyll, dothe much amuse me and infinitely ^ discontent me for many due 
respectes : yet my confidence is so greate in the honor of the cheefest under- 
taker for him, as I hope his favor in so generall a good and for so worthy a 
parsonadge shall not receave so unhappie * a cheke, whereof so good assurance 
hathe bene given and receaved; 5 and so I most humblie take my leave. From 
Dover, the 28th of July, 1591. 

Your Lordship's wholly to command, 

Henry Unton. 



VIIL 

1591, 

2 Aug. " To Mr. Grimston, at the Campe." 

Mr. Grimston. Where I have receaved speciall order and commandment 
from her Majestic to procure, with all possible expedicion, the French kinges 

' Undeserved goodness, S. P. O. 

^ I take singular comfort and incoragement, which will continew with the continuance therof and 
is the best assurance of my never endinge good, S. P. O. 

" Most, S. P. O. * Unworthy, S. P. O. 

" I forbear to wryte more for modestie and shold bee much ashamede of a worse sequele, for that I 
have herein a often instrument of the same assurance. God grawnt all for the best. Then dovrte I 
not but here as dignior shall be preferrde. I leave further to interrupt your lo. waighty afFayres ; 
wherfor I humbly take my leave with due thankes for your noble favores to my poore selfe, for the 
which I will never leave to honore and serve your lo. and bee orator to God to grawnt your lo. longe 
dayes and all increase of honore to your lo. and all yours. S. P. O, 



A. D. 1591.J 17 

confirmacion of the late accorde made by his Ambassador and 1 Monsieur de 
Reaux, his ministers, with her Majestie, which Monsieur de Reaux had 
charge speedely to send, and did undertake accordingly, and yett is not 
performed, the which, for that I cannot performe in person my selfe, I am 
therfore in her Highness name to require you (as so directed ^) to know of 
Monsieur de Reaiix, or otherwise by your good discreation, what is doune in 
the dispatich therof, and to insiste for the present sendinge it away to me, for 
that the Lord General! is not to marche further with his army into the land 
untill the saied confirmation be either come to Deepe or into England. And 
therfore, as a matter of verie greate consequence, I require your present 
answer of the Kinges resolution herein ; wherof not doubtinge but you wiU 
take goode care and advertise me with all speed, I comitt you to God, beinge 
newUe arryved, this seconde of Auguste, 1591. 

Your lovinge friend, 

Henry Unton. 



IX. 

1591, 

3 Aug.* " From the Lord Threasurer, receaved the ixth by Capitaine Allen."* 

My Lord Ambassador. Where by my laste I wrote unto you howe greatehe 
her Majestic misliked of the departure of the forces of the French kinge out 
of Brittaigne, with noe certainty of their renforcinge, ^ and for that purpose 
her pleasure was you should, as soone as you could conveniently, impart to 
the French Kinge her Majesties disposition to have Sir John Norrys and the 
forces revoked rather then to hazard them ther for lacke of succours ; — now 
her Majestic, contineuainge her former care over her people, and findinge noe 

• Here commences the copy contained in the Cotton. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 297. On fol. 413 of 
the same volume is a draft, in Sir Henry Union's hand, of the same letter, and on the same page the 
draft of another letter of the same date and to the same effect as that here adopted. 

= Directly, MS. Bodl. 

&gt; Orig. MS. Cott. Calig. E. viii. fol. 20. Damaged by fire. 

' Endorsed in the Cottonian Copy, " 3 August, 1591, from the LordThres. receaved by Captn Allen, 
the 14th." 

* Here begins the Cottonian MS. 

D 



18 [August, 

apperaunce, either by the French Kinges ambassadour here, or by Sir John 
Norrys letters from thence, of any speedie succors to be sente into Brittaigne, 
but being assured by some that lately have comen from thence that the Nor- 
mans ar all disbanded, and moste parte of the Bretons are retourned to their 
houses for harvest, her Majestie hath therfore at this present time written her 
letters unto Sir John Norris, declaringe not only her allowance for his re- 
tourne, but commandinge him also, if he shall not be speedUie succored, and 
rather then he and his companies should be in danger for lacke, to withdraw 
himselfe to the sea side to some place where her Majestie wiU sende ship- 
pinge for him and her people ; so as I feare if the French Kinge take not 
speedy regarde ther unto, Sir John Norrys shalbe with his whole troupes 
revoked and brought from thenc. The danger wherof for that countrie of 
Brittaigne, and consequently for the affaires of Fraunce, I need not explaine 
unto you ; for with griefe I write yt, and knowe noe other remedy but for 
the French Kinge to sende spedely some succours theither, wherby Sir John 
Norrys maye have somme cause of stale. And herof her Majestie hath ex- 
pressly commanded me to write to you in speede, to the end the King may 
be acquainted with her determination before ther be juste cause to put it in 
execution. 

1 At this tyme I have noe other matter to write of, but here we thanck God 
and do rejoyce to heare of 3 or 4 late fortunate accydentes to the French 
Kinges state, as the overthrowe of 4,000 of the Pope's forces ; of the over- 
throwe of Tavannes attemptinge to have succoured Noyon, and of the Deepoise 
prises of 25 shipes of Newhaven' come from the fishinge at the Bancke. 

From East horsley, the 3d of August, 1591. 

Your Lordship's assured lovinge frende, 

W. Burleigh. 

To the right honorable my verie lovinge friende. 
Sir Henry Unton, knight, ambassador leiger in 
France with the French King. 

' From this point to the end, the letter is in Burghley's own handwriting. 
^ i. e., he Havre de Grace. 



A. D. 1591.] 19 



X. 

1591, 

3 Aug. Letter from Sir Henry Unton to Sir Robert Cecyll. ^ 



loffers whom I am f 

therwith because I must write somewh ....... 

but reportes. 

Your last letter I protest did much revyve .... 

you gave me hope of your good, nowe I exp ...... 

assurance thereof, which lett me crave that ....... 

congratulate with you, and yeald you your ....... 

which I much desier. 

I praie you keepe me in the good opinion of [your] honorable father, to 
whom I use no ceremo[ny,] fearing my letters maie be seen by her Ma[jesty.] 
Good Knight, acquainte me with my errors [from] tyme to tyme, and direct 
my course to preser[ve my] lordes favor, wherein you shall onlie ma[ke me] 
happie and bynde me most. 

My Lord Generall dispatcheth in hast and ge[veth] but shorte warning to 
write, wherefore I p [ray] you beare with the shortnes of my letter, and .... 
yourself of the greatnes of my love, which ca[nnot] encrease, and shall 
ever contynue towardesy[ou and] yours. 

Thus longing to heare from you, and desirous [to] salute you, and doe you 
service, I take my lea[ve,] praying for your good more then myne owne, 
[with] encrease of honor, for the comforte of your fr[iends,] wherof I wilbe 
the cheifest, if you disda[ine] me not. Deepe, this 3^ of August, 15[91.J 

Yours allone and ev[er.] 
3 August, ]591. 
Coppie of my letter to 
Sir Robrt. Cecyll. 

' From the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 306. This Letter does not occur in the Bodl. MS. 



20 [August, 



XL 

1591, 

3 Aug. " To Mr. Fortescue.'^ i 

Sir, I praie you give me leave to entertaine your honor's good favor by 
these my letters for wante of better meanes,^ assuringe you that I will ever 
reste thanckfull for your goodness, and endevore to deserve with my beste 
fortune your honorable good opinion. 

Theise frontiere newes are not worthie your advertisementes, yett the 
probable and most certaine ar theise : that the viscounte of Tavannes ^ is taken 
prisoner before Noyon ; his companions defeated with him, and the Duke de 
Maine shortly after, and his forces also defeated by the King; him selfe 
beinge forced to flye, havinge loste 30 horse, and as many of his taken 
prisoners. The toune of Noyon is in parelle with the King, and good hope of 
renderinge it by composition. To add to this, the Kinges resolution to 
beseige Roan with all expedition, which is certaine. The reste I doe but 
report as I receave it, yett of credible persons. The beleife therof I leave to 
your discretion. 

I meane not yett to trouble your honor with my bills of transportacion, for 
that I knowe not whether I shalbe forced to goe further to attende the Kinge, 
yett his cominge is dailly expected. But shortely I shall presume to press 
your favor in the allowance of my reasonable demandes in this extreeme 
chargable tyme. Thus leavinge further to trouble you, and cravinge the 
continewance of your honors good favor, I most humblie take my leave with 
offer of my beste service. 

From Deepe, the 4th of Auguste,* 1591. 

Your honor's to commande, 
Henry Unton. 

' The draft of this letter is found in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 302. 

^ Here begins the Cottonian MS. 

3 He had been appointed chief Marshal and had been entrusted by the Dulce de Mayenne with the 
command of a considerable force. He was taken prisoner on the night of the 1st of August. See 
Memoires de la Ligue, iv. 657. 

* The draft was written on the 3d. of August, but the fair copy, from which the Bodl. transcript was 
talcen, was written on the following day. 



A. D. 1591.] 21 



XII. 

1591, 

3 Aug. " To the Lord Chancellor." 



Righte honorable, my verie good Lord. Albeit frontiers be more full of 
fables then trewe intelligences, yett can I not forbear to write, and to use this 
as an earneste of my dilligence i hereafter to followe, and the rather to assure 
you that thoughe I doe mutare catlum, yet [not] animum, to serve and honor 
your Lordship in all tymes and all places, which, for wante of better meanes 
duringe my stale abroad, my letters shall manifeste ; and I begine to crave 
pardon if in this I shall importune your Lordship. 

We are arrived here this seconde of Auguste, havinge remained at sea three 
whole nightes, and almoste three dales, for wante of a good winde ; but God 
be thanked, all her Majesties forces be safely arrived, and my Lord Generall 
verie acceptable to the French, and much honored and feasted by the com- 
mander and Governor of the towne. 

My Lord doth use me most honorable, and I doubt not but we shall verie 
well concurr in her Majesties servise ; albeit the contrarietie of our instruc- 
tions and of letters sente to us bothe might give juste cause of diflference, which 
his Lordship's wisdom dothe discreetly temper and his honorable disposition 
toUerate. For my parte, I will dewly respect his Lordship and honor him ; 
for he is well worthy therof. 

For newes I refer your Lordship to the dupUcatt of my Lord Threasurer's 
letter here inclosed,' which is the course I meane to take and observe con- 
tinually, with such sudden aditions from tyme to tyme as shalbe necessary ; 
whereby your Lordship male be thoroughly advertised of our occurrences, and 
I advertised of errors, which I humbly crave accordinge to your Lordship's 
promise. 

The Kinges uncerteintie of aboade, the daihe expectation of him here, and 
the danger of passinge to him, doe stale me here for some fewe dales ; which 
knowen, I will hasten to him for the better discharge of her Majesties service. 
I have sent a messenger to the campe, which lieth before Noyon in Picardie ; 

' Here begins the copy contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 300. 
' See the following Letter, no. xiii. 



22 [August, 

uppon whose retourne T shall better advertise your Lordship what will be- 
come of me, and the certentie of our occurrentes. In the meane season 
cravinge pardon for this my boldness, and beseechinge God to graunt your 
Lordship all encrease of honor and perfect healthe, I most humblie take my 
leave. From Deepe, the 3 i of August, 1591. 

Your Lordship's whollie to command. 

Hen. Unton. 



XIIL 
1591, 
4 Aug. " To the Lord Threasurer, the 4th of Auguste." ' 

Righte honorable, my virie good Lorde. We receaved [? arrived] here at 
Deep the seconde of this moneth, where, as thankes be to God, all her Ma- 
jesties forces are saffely landed, and my Lord General! ^ verie much honored 
of all sortes, and greatly feasted by the Commander. 

Att my first arryvall yt was my good happ to meet with Monsieur Incar- 
ville, otherwise called Saldagne ; to whom I imparted her Majesties longe ex- 
pectation of the Kinges confirmation of the late accorde, the necessitie and 
importance therof ; as also cravinge by his meanes the more speedy procure- 
ment of the same ; who was verie willinge to further it, and speedely sent his 
letters accordinglie to the campe, whose I did accompany with mine to Grim- 
stone,* according to your Lordship's direction ; -wherin I hope verie shortelie 
to procure her Majesties better satifaction. 

I was very desirous to have performed this service myselfe, and to have 
taken my journey towardes the campe at Noyon, from the which the com- 
mander and Monsieur Incarville did much diswade me ; assuringe me within 
4 or 5 dales of the Kinges cominge hither to Deepe, and of the rendringe of 
the towne by composition, and of the danger of the passage without a verie 
stronge convoye ; so that I am partly forced to attend the Kinges more cer- 
teine resolution for some fewe dales. 

' A blank was left for the date, which was afterwards supplied by Unton himself, as above, and so 
endorsed. The draft however, had been written on the second of the month. 
2 Another copy occurs in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 298. 
' Here commences the Cott. MS. * See no. viii. 



A. D. 1591.] 23 

To advertise your Lordship of Frontier newes I am somewhat fearefiill, for 
that they are commonly of no vallewe, and at this time very doubtfoll ; yett 
because Monsieur IncarviUe is my reporter, I will presume to write some what ; 
not inforcinge your Lordships beleife. 

The takinge of the viconte Tavanes, late governor of Roan, and the defeat 
of his forces where with he intended to succor Noyon, ar confirmed by letters 
to the Commander ; which dothe much amate * the enemie. 

Of the defeate also of the Duke de Mayne he hath also receaved this day 
letters ; who, hopinge of the viscounte Tavannes good successe, followed with 
some forces, which the Kinge charged in the presence of the Duke de Maine 
and forced him to flie ; killinge 80 horse in the place and as many prisoners 
taken. This is also constantly reported and believed. 

Monsieur Incarville assureth me of the Kinges certeine resolution for the 
seege of Roan, wher unto he saith all his counsell and cheefe commandours 
doe perswade him, as of as great importance to him as Paris, and not impreg- 
nable, for all the greate fortifications there used, in respecte the towne is 
neither stronge by nature or situation, and to be commanded by manie places 
above yt ; as also that there be fewe men of warr with in the toune, and not 
above 800 souldiers, and without hope of any greater supply, unless they drawe 
the Spanishe forces thither, which they pretend, and the King intends to 
prevent by a sudden aproche to the towne. 

These are the advertisements which are here current, with manie other 
circumstances, wheruppon I am verie unwilUnge to insist, perceivinge no 
great probabilities, and fearinge to abuse your Lordship with theise frontier 
newes, which ordinarily prove fables, albeit some tymes trewe. 

As I heare of the Kinges resolutions, so will I prepaire myselfe to attende 
him, and to doe her Majestic service, wherin my dilligence I hope shall excuse 
my want of sufficiencie, and your Lordship's directions and my better expe- 
rience shall more enable me to discharge the heavy burthen laied uppon me. 
But my beste comforte is that her Majestic will be pleased graciously to sup- 
porte me, and to pardon my errours, and your Lordship direct me, which I 
will seriously observe. So leavinge further to trouble your Lordship at this 
tyme, I most humblie take my leave. From Deepe this fowerth of Auguste, 

1591. 

Your Lordship's humbhe to command, 

Hen. Unton. 
' To amate, to discourage. 



24 [August, 



XIV. 



1591, 

4 Aug. " To the Lord Cobham." i 

My verie good Lord. I receaved your Lordship's letters by Mr. Brooke, 
your Lordship's sonne,^ whom it pleased you to recommend to my love, for 
the which I humbly thancke your Lordship, and doe vowe aU service to him 
and anie of yours. We have nothinge here worthy advertisement, but that 
Noyon is in parlye with the Kinge, treatinge for a compossition, and daylie ex- 
pected to be rendered. Tavannes is taken prissoner, and the Duke of Mayne 
in prison, with his forces defeated by the Kinge him selfe, and he fledd. 

Thus much is credibly hinted, but not yet assured. The Kinges resolution 
as yett holdeth for the sege of Roan. When we shall have better and more 
assured matter to write of, I will presume to advertise your Lordship, and to 
enterteine your good favor with my letters, which is my best meanes to de- 
serve in this my absence, and at my retume wilbe ready to serve your Lord- 
ship and your's. So leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, I most 
humbly take my leave. From Deepe, the 4th of Auguste, 1591. 

Your Lordship's to command, 

Henby Unton. 



XV. 

5 Aug. 

1591. " From the French Kinge, receaved by Monsieur de Reaux." 3 

Monsieur de Hompton. Ayant entendu que la Royne madame ma bonne 
seur, vous a choisy pour estre son ambassadeur pres de moy, j'ay per mesme 
moyen eu sy bonne information de voz vertus et de vostre affection a len- 

' The draft of this letter iti Unton's handwriting is contained in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 415. 

^ Here commences the Cottonian copy, 

" The original letter is preserved in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 10. 



A. D. 1591.J 25 

tretenement de la parfaicte amitye et bonne intelligence qui est entre nous, 
que j'ay este d'aultant plus ayse de I'ellection quelle a faicte en cest endroict, 
avec ceque les tesmoignages que je recois de jour a aultre de sa bonne volonte 
envers moy ; nont besoigne dautre argument pour me rendre asseure que la 
vostre y est conforme, Et affin que vous ayez aussy mesme creance que vous 
serez le bien venu [ je vous] en ay bien touIIu asseurer par la presente, at- 
tendant que j'aye ce contentement de vous veoir, remettant au sieur de Reau, 
que jenvoye par de la a vous faire scavoir plus amplement des mes nouveUes, 
comme je luy en ay donne charge. Et sur ce je prie Dieu, Monsieur de 
Hompton, vous avoir en sa saincte garde. Escrit au champ devant Noyon, ce 
15«"«i jour d'Aoust, 1591. 

Henry. 

A Monsieur de Hompton, am- Et plus bas 

bassador de le Royne d'angleterre, Revel, 

madame ma bonne seur. 



XYI. 

1591, 

6 Aug. " From Mr. Grimston ; in answear to myne to him." ^ 

My good Lord. Uppon the receipte of your letter I did move the Secretary 
and * Monsieur de Reaux for the present sendinge awaie of the Kinges ratifica- 
tion of the accorde made with her Majestic, accordinge to promise. They 
bothe toulde me it had been ready these eight daies, the which I knew to be 
trewe, and staied only for dispatch of Monsieur de Reaux to be sent by him. 
The Kinge, hearinge that the Lord Generall was descended at Deepe with 
her Majesties forces, hath commanded him to be gone presently ; he doth 
carry it with him to Nantes to have the Chancellor scale yt. Thus havinge 
made present answeare to the Kinges resolution with as great care as your 

' Tliat is, on 5 August, according to the style used in France. 

^ A copy of this letter is contained in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 400. 

' Here begins the Cottonian copy. 

E 



26 [August, 

Lordship gave yt me in charge, I take my leave, in haste. From before 
Noyon, the 6th of Auguste, 1591. 

Your Lordship's att commandement, 

Edw. Grimston. 



xvn. 

1591, 

7 Aug. "17 August, 1591, Stilo novo. M. of a letter to Sir 

Robert Cecyll." i 



geve me leave to remembre our old fren[dship] 

I long to heare of your due honor, wherfore satis [fy] 

a travaUlors longing and a frindes desire 

My newse taken up in Deepe, is not worth your 

my writing : I pray you therfore visite my 

at your idle tymes, so shall yow know as mu 

The hast of my Lord Generalls messenger will n 
longer discourse, and I am loath to charge h 
Packetes, intending thrise to her promise, thoug 
all to myne, as my dayly expenses can wit 
pray yow envie not. 

I am goeing to the Campe with in these twoe day[es] 
to doe her Majes*'^ better service, for heare Otw[ell Smyth] 
can better serve her then my self, and therfore 
pray yow, to his letters. 

Yf in this my banishment I may serve yow, le . 
your commandents, and I pray yow excuse my 
to others, whom yow finde inquisitive after 
for I assure you I have written to none, o[nly to] 
your father, my Lord Chancellor, and your self. 

1 Calig. E. yiii. fol. 308. This letter does not occur in the Bodleian MS. 



A. D. 1591.] 27 

Continew me in the good opinion of my noble 
acquainte me with my errors ; and love me your self 
yow make me more happie then I can my s 
which request I conclude, and so end your trouble 
ragged hande, and idle discourse, wishing yow 
and honorable merittes. Deepe, this 17 of August, 

your all assured and 



XVIII. 
1591, 
7 Aug. « To the Lord ChanceUor." » 

Right honorable, my verie good Lord. The double of my Lord Treasurer's 
letters I send you here inclosed, wherby your Lordship male rather perceive my 
dilligence and care to please, then receave any matter of greate consequence. 
This place is soe barren as yt will yeald noe better, and this tyme soe badd as 
it can bringe no other for ^ feare of interception and miscarriadge, which ha- 
pineth heare daily. To make amendes, I resolve within these two or three 
dales, at the uttermoste, to take my journey towardes the campe, where I hope 
to performe my office better to her Majesties Ukinge and your honors, and 
shall contente my selfe more then in this idle toune, where OtweU Smythe 
male doe her Majestic as good service as my selfe. 

Of my Lord Generall I can advise your Lordship none other waies then in 
my laste ; only this, I entermeddle not with his Lordshipps actions, neither 
have cause to mishke, for he vouchsafeth his best favor. 

The scarcitie here groweth greate by the lodginges of my Lord GeneraUs 
armye, and ells where worse ; so that I assure your Lordship my charges doe 
daiely amounte to twentie poundes, yet doe I not blanch at it, because I was 
longe since prepared for yt. My only comforte and hope is that my service 
shalbe accepted by your Lordship's mediation and my inocency defended 
againste mallice and envye. 

' The draft of this letter is contained in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. \iii. fol. 310. 
' Here begins the Cottonian copy. 



28 [August, 

If I heare not from the campe before my departure hence, I will spare to 
importune your Lordship with my letters, and my nexte shall come from that 
marshall courte which I longe to see, and wher I shall never be idle. Untill 
then I hope your Lordship will pardon my silence, for by the waie noe mes- 
senger can easily passe with any letters, and my selfe shalbe in some danger, 
which I intend to prevent with a good runninge horse. 

We hope shortly to retourne to the seege of Roan, which the Kinge re- 
solveth to attempte and hopeth to obteyne, reserving my Lord Generall 
forces for that enterprise ; but the Kinges honor is so much engaged before 
Noyon, as unlesse he be beatten he will carry it away before he departe, which 
maie some what hinder the enterprise at Roan. 

Your Lordship's venison did much serve her Majesties table and did pur- 
chase a drinckinge remembrance of your health, which if it might procure, 
your Lordship shoulde not need of the phisitions. I humbly thank your 
Lordship for it, and hope to geive some exchange for your venison. But as 
yett I understand not your French trafficke. The haste of my Lord Generalls 
dispatch and my wante of matter doe force me to conclude with all duty, 
beste praiers for your Lordship's health and encrease of honor, which procure 
my best comforte in this tyme of my banishment. Deepe, the 17th day of 
August, 1591. 

Your Lordship's most bounden to command, 

In hast as may appeare Henry Unton, 

. . . stylo novo.' 



XIX. 

1591, 

7 Aug. « To the Lord Threasurer." » 

Right honorable and my verie good Lord. I have as yet receaved noe 
letters from the campe in answeare to myne and Monsieur Incarvilles,* con- 

1 This postscript occurs only in the Cottonian draft. 

• The original draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 312. 

' Here commences the draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 29 

ceminge the hasteninge of the confirmacion of the accorde, albeit we have 
made three severall dispatches to that effecte, so that I cannot so readily 
procure her Majesties due satisfaction as I would, neither advertise your 
Lordship of any thinge therof, wherfore herin I hximbUe crave to be excused ; 
assuringe your Lordship that if within these two dales I have nothing from 
thence, I will take my journey forthwith to the Kinge, beinge promised by 
the Governor a good convoy for my safety. 

The messengers and letters betweene the campe and this toune doe mis- 
carry dayly, and all letters which come, which are verie fewe, are intercepted 
and opened by the enemie ; so that our advertisements come seldome and 
late, and of no greate importance; notwithstandinge, such as they ar, I 
humblie beseech your Lordship to accepte them, beinge the faulte of the time 
and my greife that I can send no better. 

By my laste your Lordship understandeth howe the Kinge is engaged before 
Noyon, whether he was drawen uppon the Govemour's promise to deliver it 
into his handes ; as also to keepe his armye together untiU the cominge of her 
Majesties forces, which he did so soone expecte to arrjnre. But by the abuse 
of the Governour, the Kinge is forced to continewe the seege ; and by the 
approache of the enemie, likely yett to hold longer. 

The Duke of Maigne is at a stronge castell called Ham, within five leagues 
of Noyon, with opinion to succor it, where the Prince of Ascoly' is joyned 
with 3000 horse and foote ; and Monsieur de Rosne, lieutenant to Monsieur 
de Mayne, with St. Pol, are also come to them ; so the whole forces of the 
enemy are esteemed to be 6000 foote and 2000 horse. 

The kinges forces consist of 7000 foot, 3000 Swisses, and 1200 horse, and 
hathe sent for Mompensier's forces and others to joyne with him with all 
dilligence, wherwith he hopeth to carrie away the towne, and to fight with 
the enemie. 

Since the takinge of the Viscounte Tavanes prisoner, which is assured, and 
the overthrowe of Tavannes 400 horse and 500 foote, the Duke of Aumale 
sent 300 horse to the Kinges campe to revenge their losse, who by fortune 
light uppon the quarter of the Kinges hght horsemen, where the Lord of 
Wisnes and others intertained fight with them untUl the Baron of Biron came 

^ The Prince of Ascoli had been sent by the Duke of Parma for the raising of the siege of Xoyon. 
See Mem. de la Ligue, iv. 661, Thuani Hist. ci. § 19. 



30 [August, 

to succor them, wheruppon they chased the enemie to the verie gates of Han,' 
to whose releife the Duke of Aumale sent a supphe of 150 horse more, wher- 
of the Kinges people notwithstandinge tooke 80 prisoners armed de cap en 
pied, and put to the sword as manie more; amonge whom Francisco de 
Guevarra,2 one of the Duke of Parma's chiefs commanders of his hght horse- 
men, was killed, and much lamented : and Longchampes, one of his chief 
leaders, was taken prisoner, and almoste 100 good horse. 

The Kinge hathe also lately taken by assaulte the abbaye ^ in the suburbes 
of Noyon, stronge and well fortefied, which was only executed by Sir Roger 
Williams and his companies, who behaved them selfes verie valliantly, and 
with great reputacon.* And if Capten George had been seconded, when he 
advanced him selfe to the bridge of the Towne to enter ^es?e mesle with the 
enemy, they had taken the towne, but for wante therof he was taken prisoner, 
and was sore hurte with a shot. 

In Bourbonnoys these three townes are rendred to the Kinge, Cussett, 
Vichey and Barrennes, and all Poictou is reduced to the Kinges obedience, ex- 
cepte Poictiers, by the Prince Conty, who hath also blocked that, and Marshall 
Mattignon, as it is thought, shall joine with him to the present beseeginge of 
Poictiers. 

The Pope's armye is not yett discended out of Piemonde, as the commanders 
here ar advertised from the campe, and that the same consisteth of 1500 
Italian horse, 2000 like foote and 4000 Swisses, whome Monsieur Dediguiers ^ 
and Alphonso Corso prepare to meet with all their forces in Diauphiny, if 
they pass that way ; which if they doe not, then they joine themselves with 
the Marshall Domont ^ in Burgondoe to hinder their passage. 

It is also advertised from the Viscounte of Turrenne, that the Reisters wilbe 
in Lorraine by the tenthe of Auguste, siilo novo. 

Thus havinge acquainted your Lordship with our frontier occurrentes, wish- 
inge them of greater consequence, and my selfe in such a place as I might 

^ An account of this skirmish, corresponding in its chief incidents with the present narrative, may be 
seen in the Mem. de la Ligue, iv. 658. 

' See L'Etoile's Journal, i. 137. Mem. de la Ligue, iv. 658. 

' The abbey, namely, of St. Bartholomevf . See Thuani Hist. ci. § 1 9. 

■• The courage of the English is mentioned with approbation in the Mem de la Ligue, iv. 659. 

* Francois de Bonne, Due de Lesdiguiferes, afterwards Constable of France. See Thuani Hist. cii. 
5 4- ^ Jean d'Aumont. 



A. D. 1591.J 31 

bothe serve her Majestie and advertise your Lordship, I moste humbhe take 
my leave. From Deep, the l7th of Auguste, 1591, stilo novo. 

Your Lordship's ever to command. 

Hen. Unton. 



XX. 

1591, 

Aug. 15. "To the Lord Chancellor." 

Righte honorable and my verie good Lord. I am forced to beseech your 
Lordship to pardon me for usinge the helpe of my seecritaries hand towardes 
your Lordship, by reason of my exceedinge weaknes and debyllitie by a verie 
violent burninge feavour, accompanied also with the yeallowe janders, which 
these eight dales hath continually tormented me, without any one dales inter- 
mission ; which, I assure your Lordship, hath brought me so weake as I did 
never at any time so much feele the heaviness of God's vissitacon. But this 
day, I thanke God, I feele some better ease, and hope therby to have encrease 
therof ; havinge ben greately reUeved by the care and helpe of phisitions that 
my Lord Generall brought over with him, and Mr. Jeffery, one of the Kinges 
phisitions, that maketh his abode in London, and came over for love with my 
selfe. 

Your Lordship shall here inclosed receave a double of my Lord Treasurer's 
letter, and also of the articles of capitulacion for the rendringe of the towne of 
Noyon, which beinge all that for the present I have to trouble your Lordship 
withall, I most humblie take my leave. From Deepe, the 1 5th of August, 
1591. 

Your Lordship's moste humblie to command, 

Henry Unton. 



32 [August, 



XXI. 

1591. 

15 Aug. " To the Lord Threasurer, by Mr. Smythe." i 

My verie good Lord. I moste humblie beseech your Lordship to hold me 
excused for usinge towardes you herin the hande of my servante, wherunto I 
am by necessitie forced throughe God's visitation of me with a burninge feaver 
and the yeallowe janders, bothe at one instante ; the which hath so sharpelie 
handled me as hath brought me to very greate weaknes. Neither have I at 
this 2 present any matter of wourthe to signifie unto your Lordship, but to 
advertise your Lordship what answear I have receaved from Grimston^ touch- 
inge the sendinge away of the Kinges confirmation, which he writeth that 
Monsieur du Reaulx is nowe bringinge, beinge passed by the waie of Nantes 
to have the Chancellor to putt the scale therunto, as by his inclosed letter 
will more at large appeare unto your Lordship ; whose arryvall we doe here 
continewally expect. 

Sir Roger Williams, who arrived here yesterday at night, protested likewise 
to have seen the same dispatched ; addinge also that he conceiveth Monsieur 
de Reaux is further ordered to procure the confirmation of the Court of 
Parliament of Tours of the same, which being done, he is himselfe immediate- 
ly to repaire therwith into England. 

Sir Roger WiUiams came hither with an earnest message from the Kinge, 
signifyinge his greate desier to speake with my Lorde Generall, which my 
Lorde GeneraU before his goinge towards Lorraigne, whether he is presently 
takinge his journey to hasten his strangers, wheruppon his Lord[ship ?] is 
gone only with his horsemen to meete him at Gisors, and promiseth to be 
here backe againe by the end of sixe daies, havinge lefte aU the troupes of 
foot remayninge here. 

He brought also to my selfe from the Kinge a verie kind letter, by the 
which he praieth me earnestly in no case to stire from hence untill his re- 
toume, thoughe he understood nothinge of my indisposition, which never 
the lesse without the saide charge I could not yett doe. 

1 The original letter is preserved in the S. P. O. ; the draft occurs in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. 
fol. 304. 2 Here begins the Cott. MS. 3 See no. xvi. 



A. D. 1591.J 33 

The Kinge is strongly resolved, as Sir Roger Williams telleth me, to goe 
forwarde with the seege of Roan, usinge therfore all the diUigence he can to 
hasten awaie the strangers, which when he shaU have joyned with his owne 
forces and her Majesties succors, will be an army of verie greate strength. 

On Mundayi last the Kinge entered the towne of Noyon by composition, 
wherof I send your Lordship the articles of capitulation -^ the gaininge of 
which place is here helde to be a matter of greate consequence and credite to 
the Kinges partie, not so much in respecte of the importance of the towne as 
for the dishonor which the enemie hathe receaved in publicke opinion for not 
releivinge the same, giving so stronge assurance therof and not beinge inferior, 
but rather stronger in forces than the Kinge to have perfourmed it. 

It is certified hither from the camp that advertisement is come heither that 
the Pope's armye is in Savoy, which the Duchesse dothe presse to beseege 
Grenoble in Dauphinie, wherunto Monsieur Dedigueres hath for that purpose 
put him selfe and strongly fortefied it, with resolution to defend it in his owne 
person ; that the Duke of Nemors dothe on the other side earnestly solhcite 
them to plant their seege againste Vienne neare Lyons, whether Alfonso Corso 
is, for prevention therof, repaired with 300 horse and 2000 foote, and meaneth 
to defend the same. 

By other letters from Saumur it is also advertised that the Prince of Conty 
hathe of late taken Myrebian in Poictou, a place of good importaunce, and that 
the Marshall Mattignon, accompanied with Monsieur Monluc and Monsieur 
Clermont, have defeated a greate troupe of the enemies forces under the 
conduct of Monsieur de Montpesat and Pontpadour ; and that also one Mon- 
sieur de Pictrery, an other servant of the Kinges, hath given a like blow unto 
the enemie neare unto the castell of Gontier. The which particularities, as 
they ar here receaived, I make bolde to imparte unto your Lordship, not 
daringe to avowe them to be true untill I receave better assurance of them. 

Monsieur le None, as it is here confidently reported, is dead in Brittaigne 
of the late hurte he receaved there. 

Even nowe is come into my handes the arrestes of the cortes of ParUament 
of Tours and Caen for the banishinge of the Popes authoritie out of this 
realme, with the which, after her Majestic shaU be made acquainted, it maye 
please your Lordship to communicate them with my Lord Chancellor, for 

' That is, according to the English style, the ninth of the month. 
' See them appended to the present letter. 

F 



34 [August, 

that I cannot presently recover anie more to send him. I hope shortely to 
be in state of healthe to write unto your Lordship more ampHe of thiese 
thinges ; until! when cravinge your Lordship's pardon, I moste humbly take 
my leave. 

Your Lordships most humblie to command. 

From Deepe, the fiftenth of August, 1591. Henry Unton. 



1591, 

7 Aug. " The articles of capitulacon wheruppon the towne of 

Noyon was rendred to the Kinge. " ' 

Le 17"^ jour d'Aust,^ 1591, le sieur de la ViUe, comaindant a Noyon, tant 
pour luy que pour tous les gentilhommes, gens de guere et habitants de la dicte 
ville, a promis de remettre icelle viUe de Noyon entre les manes du roy, dans 
Lundy prochain, heure de myddy, avec I'artillerie et les municions de guerre 
et les vivres, qui sont a present dans icelle viUe, sy dans demayn jour de 
Dymanche, pour tout le jour, le Due de Mayne ne donne la battaile a sa Ma- 
jestic, et luy fait lever le siege, ou quil ne jette pour le moinges mil hommes 
de guere pour secours en la dicte ville. 

Et sortira le diet sieur de ViUe, et ses gentilhomes et capitaines, avec leurs 
armes, cheavulx et baggages, et les soldats avec leurs armes et chevaulx. 

Les habitantes de la vUle faisantes ce quils doibvent, seront recus aux bones 
graces du roy, et traictes comme ses aultres bons subjectes demeurans en ses 
aultres villes. 

La mere du diet sieur de Ville pourra librement demeurer en la diet ville, 
et jouyr de ses biens, en faisant les submissions de fidellite accoustomes. 

Sy aulcuns des habitantes de la viUe se voulent retyrer, faire le pouront 
avec les gens de guerre. 

Sera permis au diet sieur de ViUe denvoyer le sieur de BrouUly devers le 
due de Maine pour ladvertire de ce que desus, et le roy luy donnera seurete 
pour ce faire. 

' Another copy of these articles occurs in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 418, and at fol. 416 of 
the same volume is the draft of a translation into English. It is printed in the " Memoires de la 
Ligue," iv. 665. ' According to the old style, August the 7th. 



A. D. 1591,] 35 

Pour accomplier ce que desuSj est aussi promis que le diet sieur de "Ville 
quil baillera pour ostages a sa Majestie le sieur de Rieaux et labbe de Seiilis,i 
et quatre des principaulx habitantes de la ville, telles qu'il plaira a sa Majestie 
les choiser; toutes lesquels sa Majestie promett rendre, en cas que les con- 
ditions cy desus soyent accompUes. 

Sa Majestie mettra dans la ville deux capitaines pour prendre garde et em- 
pecher que durant le dicte temps, q'on ny travaille point. 

Faict comme desus. Ausi signe, Henery. Et plus bas, Ruze de Ville. 

De Rieux. La Chantery, et de BrouiUy. 



XXII. 
1591, 

18 Aug. " From the Lord Threasurer, receaved the 29th by 

Mr. Jones." ^ 

Sir, After my hearty commendations. Your last letter that hath comen into 
my handes was written the I7th of August, as you have used the new style, but 
in our manner to be accounted the 7th of the same, soe as we have ' thought 
the tyme very longe not to have heard from you or my Lord of Essex since 
that day, this beinge the 18th.* I should find no lacke for the interval! but of 
one day ; but to speake directly, this large tyme past since we could heare from 
you, the rather consideringe we ar comen with in eighte myles of the sea side 
towardes you, is unpleasant not to me only (who can digest that lack ^"ith 
consideration of the sea passage, and with an opinion also that there are some 
letters at this present on the waie,) but most speciaUy offensive to her Majestie, 
who almoste hourelie all this tyme past hath expected some letters or mes- 
sages from my Lord of Essex, and from you also, to understand whether you 
be on the way to the Kinge ; your absence wherin doth most discontent the 
Queene, in that she hath to her charges sent the Earle and the army there to 

' In the copy contained in the Mem. de la Ligue, this is read " Genlis." 

» Copy in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 22. See Rymer, Feed. xvi. 114. 

' Here begins the Cott. MS. * and by some since your's being the 17. (?) Rymer, 



36 [AuGusTj 

remaine without anie use of service, spendinge also therby, besides her trea- 
sure, the tyme lymitted for his aboade there. 

Besides this her Majestie blameth me for hasteninge your journey thither, 
considering she findeth your passage nothinge ready for you, and so your service, 
as she saieth, hitherto inutile. But of these thinges no man is able afore 
hand to make certenty of accomptes, but must be subjected to uncertinty, as 
in all worldly thinges is to be seen. 

Nowe to resort to some matter and cause of my writinge. You shall under- 
stand that her Majestie, havinge more than a fortnight past sent to the prince 
D'ombes her complainte that he had no greater forces there, wherby neither 
his nor her Majesties forces joyned together were able to preserve the country 
from the rebells and enemies without greater forces to be sent from the 
French Kinge theither to their ayde ; and therefore required the prince to 
procure either more forces with speed from the French Kinge, or eUs her 
Majestie would revooke Sir John Norrys and her forces from thence. Wher- 
unto the Prince, not denyinge the juste cause of her Majesties complainte, 
said he would presently sende a gentleman to the Kinge to sollicitt further 
ayde, and to signifie her Majesties determination for the revoaking of Sir 
John Norrys ; i and within two or three dales after this answeare made by 
the prince, he gave her Majestie some further cause of miscontentment, in 
that he propounded to Sir John Norrys a pourpose bothe for the prince him 
selfe and his powers to remove out of the partes of the marytime coastes of 
Brittaigne upp into the highe lande towardes Renes, and likewise desired Sir 
John Norrys to be contente to march with him with his forces. For the 
which Sir John Norrys, beinge demanded his opinion, he flatley declared his 
mislikinge to the prince, aUeaginge for the pubhcke that if the prince should 
remove his forces from thence, all the townes in the lower part of Brittaigne 
nowe obeyinge the Kinge, (wherof the best of them arre newly recovered,) 
would all revolte to the rebell or to the enemy. And for his owne parte he 
could not without danger remove with his owne forces from the sea coast, 
where he had comoditie for victuells and succours to come out of England, 
and for that also he had a great nomber of his companie lame and sicke 
lyinge at the sea side, which he could not remove, and resolutely refused to 
remove, and to assent to the prince's own remove : of which his doinges he 
hath advertised her Majestie to knowe her pleasure what he should doe, if 

' of her forces, Cott. 



A. D. 1591.J 3/ 

the prince should presse him any further. For answear where unto her Ma- 
jestie hath presentHe written her letters, both to the Prince and Sir John 
Norrys, to these eflFectes followinge. 

First, to the Prince; a repetition of her former message for the revocation of 
her power if the French Kinge should nor speedelie send newe succours theither. 

Secondly, that she liked verie well of Sir John Norrys opinion in declaringe 
of the perills might ensue to the Kinge if the prince should remove his forces 
from the maritime partes ; and in hke sorte allowed of his refusall to remove 
his forces from thence ; concludinge with this, that if the Kinge would not send 
speedilie some forces theither sufficient to withstande the enemie, or that the 
prince would departe with his forces from these sea partes, that then she 
would send shippinge fourth with to bringe her forces out of that countrey, 
and not to waste her people by the negligence of the Kinge to give further 
ayde, whom she had so often pressed therunto. Addinge amongst other, one 
important reason, that the Kinge of Spaine had no such convenient meane 
with smale power and litteU charges to invade the kingdome of France, as bv 
Brittaigne. And if the sea coast should be abandoned by the Prince, the 
King would never have convenient aide out of England to withstand the enemyes 
their in Brettaigne. And these kinde of argumentes her Majestic hath dilated 
to the Prince, to have him to use the same to the Kinge, and not for any need 
to sturr up the Prince to allowe the same; who, shee is assured, hath cause to 
be as earnest herin as her Majestic can be. 

The argument of her letters to Sir John Norrys is much concurringe with the 
former, commandinge him to presse both the Prince and his counsell to procure 
further ayde from the Frenche Kinge in seasonable tyme, and to continue his 
diswadinge of the Prince from removinge his forces from the maritime partes, 
and commandinge him to put him selfe in readiness, if yt should appeare that 
uppon the message sent to the Kinge there arre no certaine hope of sendinge 
more forces theither, or that the Prince would, not withstandinge anie his dis- 
wation, leave him ther alone, and him selfe with his forces to departe. And 
for performance of this her Majestie's intention, her Majestic hath given order 
that all the shippes that she hathe uppon the narrowe seas should repaire to 
the islandes of Jarsey and Guernsey, and from thence to give knowledge to 
Sir John Norrys of their beinge uppon that coast to waft such hoyes as might 
be had for the bringinge of the forces away, if Sir John Norrys should finde 
him selfe provoked therunto, accordinge to her Majestie's commandment. 



38 [August, 

Nowe havinge advertised you of this action, her Majestie would have you, 
as soone as you may have access to the Kinge, to declare this her proceedinge 
to him; and that you should use all good reasons to perfourme that which was 
desired by her Majestie for the Kinges owne weale and the safetie of that 
province of Brettaigne, by which, beinge possessed by the Spaniardes, his 
realm of Fraunce shalbe sooner invaded then by anie other meanes whatsoever. 
And amonge other reasones male be alleadged that aU the trades by sea to 
Bourdeaux, Rochell, or any other partes of Gascoigne, Rochelle, or Poictou, 
are to be with small shippinge of the Kinge of Spaine's interrupted. 

I can guesse that it may be, or will be saied on the French Kinge's behalfe, 
that it behoveth her Majestie almoste as much as the Kinge to have 
Brettaigne kepte out of the Spaniardes possession, and therfore the French 
would have a hope that her Majestie would not leave it undefended ; but 
consideringe the Queene maketh not tytle to the province, she is not to be 
charged with the defence therof, as the French Kinge, whose province it is, 
and knit to his kingdome by continent land. And you may well sale, if any 
such thinge happen to be objected, that her Majestie's power ther hath bene 
greater in contynuance to gether then the King's power under the Prince, 
which hathe bene so uncerteine as some tymes for one weeke there hath not 
bene 100 for 1000. And they which doe some tymes come to the Prince doe 
not usually tarry above fourteene dales. Besides that, to answeare for her 
Majestie ; if she were not otherwise burdened for the French Kinge, with 
yealdinge him greate summes of money from tyme to tyme, and with sendinge 
and transportinge also into Normandie at sunderey times, armes, as at this 
present is seen under the Earle of Essex, with great charges, if they were not 
manifestly seen by the French, they might then fashion some better argument 
to give greater ayde to Brettaigne at this tyme. 

And thus havinge noe other matter to write of at this present, I wiU end 
with my harty thanckes for fillinge upp of your last letter with so mannie 
newes of importaunce, prayinge you to contineue in that humor. And if ther 
shalbe anie thinge from hence wher with I may acquite you, I wilbe ready, 
I assure you, to performe the same; hopinge by the time this letter shall 
come to your handes, either you wilbe gon and be present with the Kinge, 
whersoever he is ; or ells the Kinge wilbe come into those partes neare Roan, 
which if he shall not doe, the Queenes Majestie will deeplie repent her of her 
speedy succor sent with the Earle of Essex. And soe yt will appeare 



A. D. 1591.J 39 

by two of her Majestie's letters, which I send you at this present, written 
altogether with her owne hande, which when you shall deliver, you shall • 
consider the first, entituled with the Greeke letter Alpha, was written before 
she had the advertisment from Sir John Norrys ; and the other entytuled with 
the letter Betha was written since, and yett two dfdes betwixte. And so you 
shall observe that order to dehver the first to the Kinge, and afterwards the 
second, when he hath opened and redd the first, declaringe the occasion of the 
writinge of the second. 

From the Courte at Cowdraie, this 18th of August, 1591. 

Your verie lovinge fireinde, 
To the right honorable Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, Her Majestie's Ambassador, resident W. Burghley. 

in France. 



XXIII. 
1591, 

18 Aug. " The Coppy of her Majesties first letter to the French 
Kinge, written with her owne hande." 

Que je ne puis, la necessitie mestant la guyde, mon trescher frere, usir la 
plus accoustumee &gt; fa9on d'escripre a tels quilz desirent complaire, ce mest ung 
tres grand regret ; car les choses plaisantes a I'oreile, agreables a I'espritt, 
remplis des loanges, estouffes des graces, ce sont presentz qui meulx seent les 
voluntes de bons amys ; les doleances, les plainctes, les querelles, les repre- 
hensions, se doibvent tous se taire au miHeu de plumes des telz qui escrivent 
de bon ancre. Vous pouvez pourtant vous figurer le mal qui mon ceur sent, 
quant vostre gloire et mon honnexir me convient a tel subject que plus je 
fuierois et non en userois. Et pour plus ne vous retenir I'esprit en suspens, 
Je ne vous puis celer la craincte qui me tient que ce long retarder alentour de 
Noyon ne vous face perdre vostre . . . . = pour la prise de Rouen : car je 

' The original draft, endorsed by Lord Burghley, is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 237. 
The portion before the words " fa(;on d'escrire," is destroyed by fire : all that remains has been 
collated. 



40 [August, 

m'asseure que le Prince de Parma a este si assailly des mutinieres de tous 
costes, que ces forces ne sassambleront trop en haste, et les fortifications de 
la ville, si presentement vous neussiez recueilly voz forces, ny ont este si dan- 
gereuses qu'ilz seront a cest heure. Aussy cest trop de pitie que telles troupes 
que les miennes, qui ne sont a mespriser demeurent oisives en amondrissant 
les vivres et m'engendrant une risee, et ne vous servir a qui je les ay dedies. 
Si premier de les envoyer vous neussiez tant honore a me mander I'intention 
de la prise de Noyons je I'eusse peu retarder, mais me mandant que plustost 
vous I'assaillastes pour temporiser, et pour decevoir Fattente de Rouen, cela 
me fist haster mes forces, comme pourrez bien entendre quil ny alia trois sep- 
maines entre mon consentir et leur assemblee ; Monsieur de Reaux m^as- 
seurant que vous n'attendastes aultre chose que leur arrivee. Les retarde- 
mentes de voz plus urgents affaires vous ont plus dommage que la haste de 
noz ennemys. Je n'ayme point frotter les vieiUes playes ; aultrement je vous 
presenterois le peu de regard pris des maritimes quand estiez assaille a Diepe, 
puis le tant de temps donne aux rebelles Parisiens, qui vous couppa le plus 
court chemin pour finir ceste farce, jusque a I'arrivee de Parma, qui je prie a 
Dieu vous servie d'exemple pour caveat de ne refaire une telle faulte, de peur 
que n'en perdiez aussi bien voz amys comme advancer la partie adverse. Car 
d'une chose je vous puis asseurer, que quelque affection que je vous porte, qui 
ne tient trop d'exemple si nostre nation verra que le hazard de leur vies 
. . . vostre endroit ne leur sert que pour ... la consumption de leur seit, que 
pour complaire lennemy, et que celuy a qui ilz sont mandez neglige sa propre 
prosperite pour tant des divertions de plus expedients moyens pour se con- 
servir. Je ne seray doresnavant trop hastif a periller leur ruine, ains leur 
reservira a meilleure fin. Pardonnez, s'il vous plaist d'ouir le son de vostre 
faict, et quil vous souvienne que I'occasion est. Calue (sic) et ainsy je 
fineray ceste cy avec mes prieres a Dieu quil vous enspire le mieux en temps 
le plus covenable. 

Vostre tresasseure seur, 

Au roy treschrestien, E. 

Mons'. mon bon frere. 



A. D. 1591.] 41 



XXIV. 

" The coppie of her Majesties seconde letter to the French 
Kinge, also of her owne hande writinge." ' 

A dire d'adages, cest a faire a vieUes et pourcy je vous presenteray, sil vous 
^ plaist, une de nostre pays qui diet que le jour que nous oyons nouvelles jamais 
auparavant ouyes, vous gaignerons tant de temps de vostre vie, qui si la fa9on 
de France nous faict trover s'estaindre jusques la, je prolongeray trop ma vie 
pour voir les estranges accidentz que joumellement de la m'arrivent. J'ay 
nagueres receu estranges nouvelles de Bretaigne, par ou je voy le desir que 
tient Monsieur D'Ombes de se partir de ba . . . . et tirer aussi mes 
forces plus avant au pays hault : Et que . . . . de la Vardin y estant que 
desia arrive entend de se dep[artir] en diligence. Croyez vous, mon frere, 
que se sont traictementes pour prince, qui laise ses subjectz hazarder les 
vies pour vous garder le royaulme ? Sont ilz dignes destre proye a lennemy, qui 
combattent pour vous en defendre ? Si les maritimes soyent perdus, comment 
garderez vous le reste ? d'ou vient toute vostre aide, seront ces lieux enfermez 
pour ne les vous envoyer ? Je mestonne de ces resveries. Pour conclusion ; 
je veulx que cognoistrez que noz gens ne demeureront une heure si Monsieur 
D'Ombes leur delaisse, masseurant que les Espagnolz ne tarderont a y venir, 
pource sy je ne masseure que Monsieur D'Ombes n'y demeure et soit plus 
fortifie de plus grandes forces, noz gens ne seront sacrifie pour le plaisir de 
nonchsdlans. Prenez en bon gre mes rondeurs, ma patience est que trop 
esprouvee. Dieu vous donne grace de vous deciller les yeulx, et poiser par 
droicte main Umportantes davec les frivoles. 

Vostre bonne seur, 
A monsr. mon bon frere le roy treschretien. E. 

Endorsed by Cecil, 

18 Aug. 1591. The Q. second letter to the Fr. King. 

' A copy of this letter endorsed by Cecil, is contained in the Cotton MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 231. 
^ Here begins the Cottonian Copv. 



42 [August, 



XXV. 



1591, 

22 Aug. The substance of the pointes of her Ma*^' letter 

which is to be communicated to the Kinge.^ 



stance of her Counsell 
their protestacion of the Kinges readines 
not ben drawne to yeald to the same 
remained idle, by reason of his unreadin 
holdeth her self verie much wronged with 
cessarie losse of tyme ; and therefore 
presentlie to resolve uppon the use of them 
as was promised by his said mynisters 
(besides the injurie donne to her by this d 
the prolongation thereof cannott but wourke 
prejudice the said enterprise. 

Her Majestic praieth him also with no lesse ea 
remember her late motion made unto him for 
of his forces in Brettannye, and therein 
order for that besides the enemies present 
so farre exceeding the Kinges nombers, and 
she is advertised that the Kinge of Spajme 
readines 3000 or 4000 men more at the Groyne to shipp 
thither : or that otherwise for the default there 
forced to revoke Sir John Norrys. 

She praieth him also to consider that 
of himself so farre from Roan cannott but 
inconvenient to the said action. 

LastUe, she desireth, that in the emploiement 
said subjectes, he wilbe pleased to have 
male not above others be exposed to the s 

&gt; From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 404. 



A. D. 1591.] 43 

greatest desperatnes. And these her req 
tender in his deare'care, as thinges which 
from her harte with all effectuallnes rece 
him. 



XXVI. 

1591, 

22 Aug. " From her Majestie ; receaved the 28th by Mr. Smythe." ' 

ELIZABETH R. 

Right trusty and wel beloved, we greet you well. Uppon knowledge geven 
us of your continuinge sicke of an ague at Deepe, wherof we heard nothinge 
untill the cominge of this bearrer, Thomas Smythe, from thence, we found our 
selves much greived therwith, for that the same hath happened to you in a 
strange countrey, althoughe we hope you shall be shortly recovered, which the 
messenger reported you were towardes. And findinge nowe that our forces 
were sent thither in such haste as they ar inutile, because the Kinge with his 
forces hath not ben ready there, as was formerly promised by him and his 
mjTiisters when they provoked us thereto, thoughe in verie truthe we didd 
always feare the redy performance of their promises when we understood that 
the Kinge had directed himselfe to the seege of a towne farr of, from whence 
he knewe not howe to remove ; yett such was the importunity of the Kinge 
and his ambassadours here, and the inclynation of our counsell to geive more 
creditt to the promisses than we our selves hoped to be performed with that 
speed that was promissed, as we were in a manner ledd therunto against our 
owne opinion. And yett nowe leavinge all newe debate therof, because of 
that which is past, we finde yt most necessary that all meanes be used to 
delaie no more tyme, but seriously and with celerrity to amende this error. 

And therfore, thoughe by the Kinges absence and your sicknesse you cannot 
presently, as our ambassadour, showe to him these preposterous actions in 
sendinge our forces thither as an ayde to his in those partes, where his was 
not come, as were promised ; yett we require you, by advice of Grimston, or 
by some other waies, if your health wiU not suffer you to goe to him, to make 
choise of some of his counsell that are noted men of experience and fidellitie, 

' The original is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii fol. 233. See Rymer's Feed. xvi. p. 1 17. 



44 [August, 

and directe your letters to them, with such earnest reasons as the cause re- 
quirethe : and specially the Kinge to ponder the weight of our laste letters, 
which were sent to you as well for the acceUeratinge of this accion for Roen, 
as for further succors of Brettaigne, to which we dailie heare the Kinge of 
Spaine sendeth new forces. And amon[g]ste other reasons to be used, you 
male sale also that we our selves doe well consider howe dangerous it shalbe 
to devyde his forces, at the least so to esloigne him selfe from this action of 
Roan, as for further succours for Brittaigne, as by lacke of his presence the 
interprise must be more doubtefull ; specially consideringe he hath loste such 
opportunity of tyme paste since he determined it, havinge neglected occasion, 
which is figured bald, and beinge once past cannot be recovered. 

You shall not omitt to let him knowe that for our greate kindness manie 
waies shewed to him, and specially by yealdinge to him the services, yea the 
hazard of the lives of soe many of our subjectes, we doe firmely hope that he 
will have no lesse respecte to them for puttinge them to desparate hazardes 
then he will have to his owne subjectes. 

These reasons and arguments you may use, as proceadinge from our writinge 
from our owne mouthe and from our owne harte, presuming that where we 
have so urgent and great reasons either to write or speake earnestly, the Kinge 
will interprett the same in good parte. And so we end ; wishinge you to 
have care of your own health, which we desier as much to hear of as any 
friende you have, exceptinge your own wief. Geven under oure signett, at 
Chichester, the 22nd of August, 1591, in the 33*. yeare of our raigne. 

To our right trustie and welbeloved 
Sir Henry Unton, Knight, our ambas- 
sador resident in France. 



XXVII. 

1591, 

22 Aug. " From the Lord Threasurer, by Mr. Smythe ; 

receaved the 28." i 

Sir, 

After my hartie commendacions. Althoughe I was glad to heare from 

' The original is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 24. See Rymer's Fo^d. xvi. 
p. 117. 



A. D. 1591.] 45 

you by your letters brought by this bearrer, Mr. Smythe, havinge not many 
owres before directed letters unto you with some matters of importance ; yet 
I was sorry to heare of your continewance there at Deepe by occasion of your 
sickness ; both for the ill accident to your selfe, and also for hinderance of 
such services as were committed to you by these my letters, which, if your 
health have not served you to expedit with your own person, I doubt not you 
have directed the same to Grimston, with your wise instructions howe to 
negotiatt for the same ; for we finde by day he advertisementes that not only 
the Kinges forces with the Prince D'Ombes rather diminisheth then en- 
creaseth, but also the forces out of Spaine were within these foure dales ready 
to be transported over into Brittaigne to the nombre of 3,000 or 4,000 men ; 
so as truly it behoveth the Kinge to repaire this lacke, or els her Majestie 
must of necessitie revoke hers, which was the matter expresshe conteyned in 
her late letters to the Kinge. 

1 hartehe thanck you for your sundrie good newes ; thoughe two unhappie 
accidentes, the escape of the Duke of Guise ' and the death of Monsieur la 
Noue,'* hath shroudlie abated the pleasure of the others. 

And so havinge no other matter, nor indeed comoditie to write at this tyme, 
by reason I am forced to keepe my chamber with the accesse of my former 
greif, thoughe I hope within fewe dales to be dehvered of yt, I wishe unto us 
bothe a like measure in health and ease. 

From the court at Chichester, the 22nd of August, 1591. 

Your assiired lovinge friende, 

To the right honorable Sir W. Burghlie. 

Henery Unton, knight, &amp;c. 

1 He escaped from the castle of Tours on 15 August. An account of this incident may be seen in 
Thuanus, ci. § 20 ; L'Etoile, i. 134. 

' Killed by a musket shot at the siege of Lamballe, while reconnoitering the enemy. Thuanus, cii. 
§ iii ; L'Etoile, ibid. 



46 [August, 



XXVIII. 

1591, 

23 Aug. " To the Lord Threasurer by Mr. Bonner." ' 

My verie good Lord. Since my laste, Monsieur de Reaulx is arryved here, 
with whome I have dealt about the Kinge's ratification,^ I have made bould 
plainely to charge him with his remisnes that the same hath ben so longe 
delaied ; or, at the least, that her Majestic hath not ben advertised from him of 
the causes of the impedimentes therof, the which he seameth to excuse many 
waies. As by my laste I signified to your Lordship, he went by the waie of 
Mantes to have the same sealed by the Chancellor, who was absent and no 
certenty of his retourne ; and notwithstandinge he lefte yt then, and hopeth 
everie day we shall receave it so sealed, but not so soon confirmed by the 
Court of Parliament and chambre of comptes, which he saithe will require a 
monethes tyme.^ Himselfe repaireth presently into England, to give her Ma- 
jestic (as he telleth me) * full satisfaction herin, and in all other matters. And 
because he can beste make reporte of the Kinges proceedinges, I leave the 
same to his relacion. Only it may please your Lordship to knowe that in 
two letters, which of late I receaved from the Kinge, he giveth me contynuaU 
assurance that he is resolute in his intention for Roan. 

I have made a dispatche unto the courte ^ concerninge the matter of Bret- 
taigne, wherof I have not yett receaved answeare. I proteste unto your 
Lordship moste faithefolly, yt dothe infinitly greive me that this my unfor- 
tunate sicknes dothe keepe me from foUowinge the Kinge ; wherby I might 
with better commoditie discharge my duty towardes her Majestic, as I did 
fully intende to have donne. Since the tyme of my first visitation, I have not 

' The original draft of this letter, abounding with corrections by Unton, is contained in the Cottonian 
MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 420. The original letter itself is in the State Paper Ofl5ce. 

' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 

' The original here inserts this sentence—" He hath brought a duplicate of that which the Kinge and 
his Secretarie hath signed, which I have seen." This passage is also in the Cottonian draft. 

* This clause is not in the original, but it occurs in the draft. 

■' Uppon your L. of the third hereof, sent me by Captain Allen, concerninge the matter. Orig. but 
not in the draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 47 

bene able to stirr out of my bedd, neither yett can I yette promise to my selfe 
anie better assurance of better estate. ^ And so I most humbly take my leave. 
From Deepe, the 23'" of August, 1591. 



XXIX. 

1591, 

24 Aug. " To the Lord Threasurer by Romano."^ 

My verie good Lord. This daie there is brought me from jMantes the 
Kinge's confirmation under the broade scale, sent heither to the Chancellor, 
who with all ^signifieth that he hath sent a dupUcatt therof to Tours to be 
ratified by the Court of ParUament there, and receive performance of the 
other ceremonies belonginge to the same ; the which, as soone as it cann be 
accomplished, ther shalbe like care taken for the sendinge of yt away also 
with as much speed as may be. I thought good presently to dispatch this 
bearer to your Lordship therewith, as well in respecte of thimportance therof, 
as also for that I presume it will yeald your Lordship better satisfaction then 
Monsieur de Reaux arryval gave. 

The Kinge hathe in hand a secrett practise for the surprisinge of New haven ; 
the which his servantes here do assure to be verie faisible, in respecte of the 
stronge partie which he hath at his devotion with in the saide towne. 

Wee have newes that my Lord General! will without faile be with us here 
tomorrow * at night from the Kinge. 

Your Lordship dothe herin see a better demonstration of willingness to doe 
her Majestic service then as yett my poore weake body doth enable me to 

' It may please your L. to lett me know howe Her Majestie resteth satisfied with Monsr. de Reaux 
answeare touchinge the ratification, which wilbe a contentment unto the Lord General!. And so 
beseeching your L. to pardon my short writing, by reason of my weaknes, I most humblie take my 
leave. In the original, but not in the draft. 

' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office; the draft occurs in the Cott. MS. Calig. 
E. viii. fol. 316. 

3 Here the Cottonian draft begins. 

* Underlined by Burleigh ; who has written opposite it, " on Wednesday." 



48 [August, 

perfourme ; the which I beseech your Lordship to accepte for my excuse. And 
so I most humbly take my leave. From Deepe, the 24th » of August, 1591. 

Your Lordship's humblie to commande, 

Henry Unton. ^ 



XXX. 

1591, 

28 Aug. " To Grimston, at the Campe." 3 

Mr. Grimston. I have this dale receaved letters from her Majestic ; * con- 
teyning in the same, pointes to be communicated to the Kinge ; the which, 
because of my owne sickness and absence from thence, she willethe me to 
negotiate by such persons ^ as I shall thincke meete, which I have thought good 
by reason of your experience to committ to yoxu: care ; prayinge and requiringe 
you accordingly in my name to signifie the same on her Majesties behalfe, 
ether to the Kinge him selfe, or such of his Counsell, or both, as you shall 
thyncke beste. For which purpose you shall understand that the contents of 
her Highnes saied letters are these. 

First, she findeth her selfe virie much wronged that her forces sent hither 
to the Kinge's aide ; the haste of whose cominge his ministers with her 
solicited with greater importunity then she liked, and would have assented 
unto, if at the instance of her Counsell, who were led to beleve their pro- 
testation of the Kinges readynes for them. And therefore she dothe most 

' Tuesday, also in Burleigh's hand. 

^ The following postscript occurs in the original, and is also found in the Cottonian draft, but is 
omitted in the Bodleian copy. " I was told uppon the vertue of her Mat', pasporte, (the which, as I 
conceive, geiveth me lycence for the transportacion of my needful provisions,) to write to the officers of 
Rye to suffer some quaiititie of beare to passe for the use of my house ; the which I understand they 
refuse to doe, without your L. allowance thereof. Yt male please your L. therefore so much to favor me 
as to send me, by this bearer, your letter patent, bearing addresse to all partes, to give me tolleration 
in this behalf for any necessarie provisions ; and I protest unto your L., I will not further emploie the 
same then as shalbe for the privatt occasion of my house." 

3 The draft of this letter occurs in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 318. 

^ Namely, No. xxvi. 6 Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



A, D. 1591.] 49 

instantly praie him, as well in the respect he beareth to the honor of his 
promise, as also as he tendreth to be further beholdinge to her Majesties 
favors, to resolve presently for the use of them for the purpose which you 
know was pretended ; wherof the present delajdnge cannot but wourke virie 
greate prejudice to the said action. And ther withall she praieth him hkewise 
to consider that it can be no lesse inconvenient to the saied interprise to 
devide his forces as he hath done, and to keepe him selfe so remote from 
the saied place, • beinge specially behovefull he should addresse himselfe 
hitherwardes. 

And further, she desireth the Kinge with no less earnestness to remember 
her late motion made unto him for the supplyinge of his forces in Brittaigne, 
and therin to take speedie order ; for that, besides the enemies presente forces 
there so farr exceedinge her Majesties succours and the Kinges nombers, she 
is advertised that the Kinge of Spaine hathe in a readines at the Groyne 3000 
or 4000 men more to shipp to the aforesaid place of Brittaigne. Or otherwise 
that she shalbe forced, for the default therof, to revocke Sir John Norris. 

* For the accelleratinge of bothe theise matters, I praie you faile not to presse 
the Kinge, or otherwise, as you shall thinck good, with all instantness, as 
thinges which her Majestie doth with greatest care and desire recommend to 
his performance ; and advertise me with all speed of his resolution herin, 
that I may satisfie her Majestie, who expecteth to receave present answeare 
from me. And assure your selfe, that with all I wiU make reporte of your 
travaUe and diligence used in these her Highnes services to further you, as 
much as in me lieth, to that recompence for the same which you deserve. I 
doe imagine that my Lord Generall is on his way heitherwardes, which is the 
cause that I forbear to write unto his Lordship ; but if he be yett remayninge 
there, then I pray you to acquainte him with these my letters. And soe I 
committ you to God. From Deepe, the 28th of Auguste, 1591. 

Your lovinge friende, 

I pray you to conferr with Monsieur deRevol Henry Uxton. 

hereuppon; by whom you shall understand 
more amplie these thinges, for that I have en- 
treated Monsieur de Saldagnie to write unto 

' " The said towne of Roan," draft, but afterwards altered as it stands in the text. 
' This paragraph is inserted in the margin of the Cottonian draft, instead of one struck through. 

H 



50 [August, 



him at large in cipher of them, which I durst 
not hazard to doe to you for lacke of a cipher 
betweene us. And also advise with him for 
the procuringe of her Majesties speedy satis- 
faction. 



XXXI. 

1591, 

30 Aug. « M. to the Lord Generall." i 



2 contentment that it woude 
to have imparted unto me the intention 
prise; as also what will become of your Lo : I impute 
occasion of busines, .... . . 

As soone as I shalbe in some better state of d . . . 

to looke abroade, I will not faile to come t .... 

all the speede I can, both for the better disch 
duetie to her Majestic, as also for the greate desire 

companie ; being exceeding ..... 

of this place. And so I most humblie ta . . . . 

From Deepe,the 30th of August, 1591. 

Yo' L. to CO 

Henry . 

' From the draft contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii, fol. 314. 

2 The following paragraph occurs in the margin of the manuscript . . . deth his 

cause that I might for her Maties. better service accordingly dispose of myself; hopinge I shall bee 
very shortly able so to doe. 



A. D. 1591.] 51 



XXXII. 

1591, 

31 Aug. " To the Lord Chancellor, by John de Vignes." i 

My verie good Lord. I thought it my duty to advertise your Lordship of 
the state of my poore healthe, my unhappie crosse at this tyme, wherin ^ I 
thancke God I begine to feele some good fruites of amendment, wantinge nowe 
only strength to recover me, havinge susteined very greate extremitie of weak- 
nes ; as I have ben verie litteU able, since the tyme of my firste sickness, to 
stirr out of my bedd, and as yett cannott walke in my chamber with oute 
helpe. 

Since my arryvall in this country I have receaved noe letter from your 
Lordship, thoughe I doubte not but your Lordship hath vnritten some one. I 
moste humblie beseech your Lordship, vouchsaffe me the favor to lett me 
heare from you, which wilbe my best contentment and comforte only to hear 
of your Lordship's healthe, and of the continewance of your accustomed honor- 
able favor and goodness towardes me ; which I will never cease by all the 
meanes of my poor service and uttermoste indevours to acknowledge, and with 
all duty to entertaine. 

^ It greeveth me thus miserabUe to dwell in the towne, and to be absent 
where and when my service should be moste used, and is moste required ; but 
I will not, God wiUinge, faile to attende the Kinge at his retourne, by which 
tyme I shall recover sufficient strengthe. 

My Lord Generall hath been with the Kinge, and is now at Pont de Larche 
neare Roan. He hathe commanded awaie her Majesties forces from hence, 
with verie meane direction ; and his cheife officers ar note the moste discreete 
in the carriage of them selfes ; which will breed many inconveniences. His 
Lordship hath not written one woxirde to my selfe nor Mr. Killegrewe since his 
retourne, nor what he intendeth to doe with [the] forces, or howe herafter he 
meaneth to dispose of him selfe; which dothe somewhat discontente us; so 

' The original draft of this letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 422. It contains many 
corrections by Unton, and a large portion of it is in his own handwriting. 
' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 
' From this point, the draft is in Union's own hand. 



52 [August, 

that were it not that I have good intelligence ells where, I knowe not what to 
write of the cause of risinge of our campe, nor of the Kinge's intentes ; yett 
have I written at large to my Lord Threasurer j the coppy wherof I send your 
Lordship. 

Her Majestie by her own gracious letters ^ was pleased to give me singular 
comforte, and to have care of my health ; for which I humbly beseech your 
Lordship to yealde my due thanckefuUness, if your Lordship be present at 
Courte. I assure your Lordship yt hath bine a greate cause of my recovery. 
I will not overholde your Lordship with my idell discourses, but beseeche God 
to graunte your Lordship perfect health and trewe contentment, and to make 
me more worthy of your honorable favor. Lett me crave your Lordship's 
pardon for not writinge with my owne hande, beinge, I protest, nott able as 
yett. And so, &amp;c. Deepe, the 31st of August, 1591. 

Your Lordship's humblie to command, 

Henry Unton. 



XXXHL 
1591, 
31 Aug. " To the Lord Threasurer, by John de Vignes." 2 

My verie good Lord. Her Majesties letters of the 22th ^ hereof, together 
with your Lordship's sent by Mr. Smyth, * I receaved on Satterday laste the 
28th of this present ; and her Highnes and your former of the ^ 17th and 18th,6 
the nexte day followinge, by Mr. Joones; so that the firste came laste. Uppon 
the receipte whereof, I failed not that dai to make a dispatch unto the campe, 
as well unto Grimston 7 as also to some of the Kinges counsel!, [by the 
meanes of Mons"^ deSaldagne, and did not faile to intymatt with all earnest- 
ness unto the Kinge and his counsell] s the pointes of her Majesties said 

' See No. xxvi. 

» The original of this letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft partly in Union's handwriting, is 
in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 322. 3 See No. xxvi. * See No. xxvii 

^ Here begins the Cottonian draft. 6 ggg j^g_ ^^j^^ 

' See No. xxx. 

8 The passage inclosed in brackets is introduced from the original and the draft, having been acci- 
dentally omitted by the copyist of the Bodleian MS. 



A. D. 1591.] 53 

letters, accordinge to her grave directions ; wherof I hope shortelie to procure 
answeare for her Majesties satisfaction ; albeit manie letters and messengers 
miscarrye, and the Kinge be hardly i to be founde. 

I must not forgett, with aU duetie, humblie to beseech your Lordship to 
vouch safe me the favor to acknowledge unto her Majestic my moste humble 
and lowlie thanckfulness for her Highness so exceedinge gracious care and 
princely regarde of my poore health, which by her saied letter I receaved, to 
my never endinge comforte. And I protest unto your Lordship, it hath 
infinitely revyved and res[t]ored my poore spirittes, which I owne to youre 
Lordship were mighteUe oppressed with greife in that I was restrained by 
sickness from geivinge due testimonie to her Majestic of my servicable and 
devoted minde; which nothinge ells could, or shoulde, have hindered, but only 
God's visitacon. And my greife was the greater in that my service was so 
required and of such necessitie. Not withstandinge, I hope shortely to make 
amendes for so greate intermissione and slackness ; for that, I thancke God, 
I beginne to feele some good efFectes of recovery ; albeit I am brought verie 
weake and feeble. 

The Lord Generall is not yet retourned hither, but hath this day sente for 
the forces to meete him at Martinville by Pont de Larche, beinge himselfe 
there at Pont de Larche uppon a secrett intention to intercept Villars, Gover- 
nor of Roan, and to defeate him and his troupes ; who understandinge his 
Lordship was makinge his retourne from the Kinge, doth with most of his 
forces waie lay him ; wherof his Lordship hopeth to retorte the practise uppon 
him selfe, beinge already sixe hundred horse stronge, with his owne and those 
of Pont de Larch. And if yt please God to blesse this interprisse with good 
success, the same wilbe a verie greate introduxtion to the axtion of Roan ; for 
that they have noe other succourse for their defence then those by the which 
Villars dothe now serve him selfe. Of this matter his Lordship hath written 
nothinge to my selfe, wherof to advertise your Lordship certeinly; but I 
understand it otherwise from [a] verie good hand that this is the scope therof. 

The Kinge departed on Friday* last towardes Challons, accompanied with 
500 or 600 horse, to meete the army of Reiters there, from whom he receaved 
advertisement of their arryvall at Metz the 28th ^ of this present moneth, 
stilo novo ; with a further declaration, that since the saiede armies dislodginge 

1 In the original letter " hard." ■' Namely, on the 27th. 

^ That is, on the 18th according to the English calendar. 



54 [August, 

from Strasburge there is joyned to the same above 600 Frenche horse and 
foote of persons that had retired them selfes out of the realm by occasion of 
the present troubles ; so as the saied army is therby greatly encreased. 

There have ben of late letters intercepted of the Duke of Lorraines to the 
Duke of Mayne, by the which he signifieth to him that if he doe not speedelie 
send him succour and have better regarde of him and his countrie, that he will 
not faile to make his particular peace with the Kinge, and utterlie renounce 
henceforth the saied dukes partye, for he is greately discontented and wearie of 
the warr. 

And out of the Lowe Countreys the King is further advertised that the Duke 
of Parma is retourned home to Brussells from the Bathes, and that he hath 
sente abroade to assemble his van and arriere van ; wherby, and with the reste 
of his forces, he prepareth him selfe to enter this countrey ; but that by reason 
of the great intelligences and practises which he discovereth the States have in 
his townes, he findes he cannott marche with more than sixe thousand foote 
and 3000 horse. Herof your Lordship, I knowe, is better advertised; and 
therfore I write sparingUe. 

Monsieur Chastillion ' and Monsieur Montigny, as it is written hither verie 
confidently from the campe, and likewise other wise confirmed, have of late 
defeated four hundred horse of those of Orleans which came fourth to the 
succor of the towne of Meuse, beseiged by the said Monsieur Chastillion and 
Montigny, which also they have carried awaie. 

The Marshall of Biron is on his way with all the kinges army towardes 
Gisors, where he wilbe this weeke, and intendeth to make his aboade ther- 
abouts, until the kinges retourne, and then to imploy the general! forces in the 
seege of Roan, which the Kinge hasteneth with all speede he can, and for 
which purpose her Majesties forces shall contynue in those partes ; " so that 
nowe they begine to drawe towardes the enterprise of Roan, which they con- 
stantly resolve. 

Thus much I thought necessarie to advertise your Lordship, which is all 
wourthe the wrightinge, and wherwith I end your Lordship's trouble ; not 
forgetting your Lordships contynuaU favors and goodness, wherof I taste by 
your honorable letters, beinge my beste incouradgment. And I humblie 
beseeche the continewance therof, as the trew almynacke of my good, and with 

' Francois de Coligny, Sr. de Castillon. 

2 From this point to the end, the draft is in Unton's handwriting. 



A. D. 1591. J 55 

all crave your grave advice from tyme to tyme for the acquittinge me with my 
errors, that I may reforme and better fashion myselfe to her Majesties service 
and your Lordships likinge. And soe I beseeche God to give your Lordship 
encrease of health and honor. I humblie take my leave. From Deep, the 
31'" of August, 1591. 

Your Lordship's humbly to command, 

Henry Unton. 



XXXIV. 

1591, 

2 Sept. " Copie of her Majesties Letter to Sir Thomas Leighton, and 
Mr. Killegrewe ; which came not untill nowe into my handes."' 

ELIZABETH R. 

Right trustie and well beloved, we greete you well. Althoughe we hope 
that bothe of you will have dewe regarde of suche directions as by your owne 
mouthe hath ben severally deUvered to you for the counsellinge and advisinge 
of our cosen the Earle of Essex, generall of our armye ther ; yet some cause 
we have to doubte of you, Henerie Killegrewe, that beinge sente over with the 
Earle and presente when he departed with our army to the French Kinge 
without our knowledge, we know not whether you did advise him from that 
journey untill we had allowed therof or noe, or what you did therin we knowe 
not ; but what you ought to have done we thincke your self cannott be ig- 
norant. And nowe where he is, or what he doth, or what he is to doe, we 
ar ignorant also ; for since his goinge from his charge we never heard wourd 
from him. But omittinge this error past, nowe we thincke it meete you 
should understands howe more errors are committed, for hither came Mon- 
sieur de Reau, as you, Leighton, doe knowe, and after your departure after he 
had ben seven deiies in our realme, passinge by us within less then two myles, 
at lengthe he came ; and with letters written before Noyon was taken, he de- 
clared certein causes of the Kinges absence from these partes at this tyme, 
when by accorde betweene him and us, uppon the arryvall of our forces, he 
shoulde have come with his army into those quarters to have beseeged Roan, 
wheras it [is] scene our forces have ben there aboute one moneth at ova greate 
' The original draft in Burghley's hand is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



5G [September, 

charges and to noe purpose, without any apparance of forces provided on the 
Kinges parte. And further, he hath made request that we should commande 
the Earle of Essex to emploie our forces to some other purpose, as the French 
Kinge should finde it good for him selfe. And thoughe the saide de Reau 
hath used many arguments to perswade us there unto, yett consideringe we 
perceivinge what inconveniences and inestimable charge these motions would 
drive us, and howe contrary to all reason and honor the intention we had in 
yealdinge to these succours is meante to be frustrate, we have flately denyed 
to assent therunto, and have so advertised the saied Earle by our letters, with 
charge that he doe only obey our commandement, and use your advises, and 
observe the purposes for the which we sent him, and as was solemly accorded 
betweene the French Kinge and us, and his armye to joyne vdth us to the 
beseeginge of Roan, and that only for the space of two monethes, wherof one 
monethe is alreadie past, and but one remaininge, within whiche tyme we finde 
no reason to thincke that any thinge of momente can be donne to the towne 
after soe large delay geven to the enemye to fortifie yt. 

And yet because on our parte nothinge shalbe omitted that we have pro- 
mised, we ar content that our forces shall continewe to the ende of the seconde 
moneth, to be accompted from the tyme of their arryvall ; and after that 
tyme our full purpose is they shalbe revoaked, against which tyme shippinge 
shall be provided to transporte them into our realme. But if it should happen, 
which we thincke unlikely, that the French Kinge shall presentlie and with- 
out delay attempte to beseege it, and that before the ende of the seconde 
monethe, it may be probable that the continuaunce of our forces for the space 
of one moneth, or fortie dales more, mighte help to bringe the enterprisse to 
effecte, we shalbe contented that either the whole or parte therof shall remaine 
soe as it may be made certeine and plaine before hande that the French Kinge 
will make like good paiement to them weekely, as we have donne duringe 
their aboade ; for other wise we wiU not have anie of them to abide longer 
then untiU they may be shipped after the ende of the seconde moneth, 
wherin we will have you not to be abused by any promises of wourdes ; but 
by certeinty of paie, wherof we raaie doubte howe the French Kinge shall 
perfourme that, consideringe in the tyme of the Lord WiUoughby promises 
were made of paiement to our forces for ther longer abydinge then was at the 
first intended, yett the paie which they had, thoughe it was named to be the 
French Kinges paie, was with our money lent here to his ambassadours beinge 



A. D. 1591.] 57 

parcell of greater sommes due to us. Nevertheless yett you maie seeke to under- 
stand of Monsieur Saldagne and others their, whither the monie collected and 
graunted to the Kinge by the parliament of Caen hath ben reported to be 
graunted conditionally that the Kinge shoulde enterprise to take Roan, maie 
not in parte be assured to paie our forces for the surplusage of the tyme they 
shall serve ; wherof if good assurance may be had for ready weekly paiements, 
we shalbe more willinge to have them continewe to the only purpose for the 
winninge of Roan or New haven, but for no other pourpose. And herof you 
shall conferr with our Generall ; and as you shall finde this matter probable to 
be duly performed, so you shall treat therof with the Kinges counsell there, 
and speedely advertise us whatt may be hoped for and with what assurance 
the same may be perfourmed ; because accordinge to that which you shall ad- 
vertise us, the shippinge maie be sente againste the ende of the nexte moneth, 
or other wise staled. 

From Leychfeild, the 2 of September, 1591. 

[Postscript written with the Lord Threasurer's owne hand.]' 

By the Queenes commandement I do let you 
understand that her Majestie hearing after this 
letter signed, that her Majesties ambassador was 
not yett departed from Deepe, would have you 
imparte this her letter to him, and to use his ad- 
vice and creditt as her Majesties ambassador, 
with any pertaininge there to the Kinge, And 
so I have by her Majesties commandment ad- 
vertised him of her pleasure. 

To our trustie and well beloved servantes, 
Sir Thomas Leighton and Henery Killegrewe, 
esquire. 

' This postscript is not found in the draft. 



58 [September, 



XXXV. 

1591, 

5 Sept. " From the Lord Chancellor ; receaved by my 

servant Joanas. " ^ 

My owne good Lord. I am right sorry and sadd to heare that you are 
sicke, and the more dothe it disquiett me in that I cannott learne anie cer- 
taintie of the manner of your * disease ; some reputinge it to be a fevor, and 
some the yeallowe janders, Lett me, I praye ycfu, for my owne. quiettness 
sake, understande in what state you are, that in case you should neede any 
helpe from hence, order may be taken for it. Nothinge shall wante, I can 
assure your Lordship, that possible may be hadd. 

At my late beinge at the Courte, I heard nothinge of your Lordship's sick- 
ness ; but that since from Sir Robert Cecill, your good freinde, I receaved un- 
derstandinge of it, and with all howe much her most excellent Majestic was 
perplexed to heare therof, what care her Highnes tooke for your recovery, 
and the gracious good opynion she conceaveth of you. This I signifie to 
your Lordship, that you may take more comforte to consider her princely care 
over you, both for your selfe, (in that shee esteemeth so of you,) as also in 
respecte of her owne services, which shee hopethe cannott but prosper exceed- 
inge well throughe your negociation, wherin shee hath settled an especiall 
affyance in the whole course of that action. 

Sir, this wante of healthe, which soe unseasonably hathe happened unto 
you had almoste brought the good lady your wief to deathes doare ; but I hope 
you shall receive longe comfort of each other, and I moste heartely wish it. 
I have beene visited my selfe of late with some distemperature of body, and 
therby forboore the longer to write unto you ; but this must not breed anie 
conceipte in your Lordship at any tyme, for you knowe the grounde of my 
affection towardes you. Newes I have none to imparte unto you, for we re- 
ceave them altogether from thence, as the occurrentes of the worlde frame at 
this present. I wilbe alwaies carefuU of your Lordship as a freind in any 
thinge which may either concerne your benefitt, honor, or reputacon. And 

' The original letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 153. 
- Here begins the Cottonian transcript. 



A. D. 1591.] 59 

soe my deare good Lord, wishinge you moste happie success in the whole 
course of this your honorable emploiement to the satisfaction of your Prince 
and good of your countrey, even as I would to my seUe, I commend you to the 
protection of the Lord Almightie, Who send you perfect health. From 
London, the 5th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordships most assured true freinde. 

To my verie honorable good Lorde, Chr. Hatton, Cane. 

Sir Henery Unton, Knight, Lord Am- 
bassador for her Majestie in France. 

[Appended to the transcript contained in the Bodleian manuscript, is the 
following memorandum.] 

" I wrote to the Lord Threasurer by Mr. Darcye ; but could not for haste, 
reserve a coppie therof." 



XXXVI. 

1591. 

6 Sept. " From the Lord Threasurer, receaved the 6th." i 

After my harty commendations to your Lordship. The ignorance of the 
passinge of matters there hath ever since your last writinge bredd disquietness 
here, havinge no certeintie nor eJmoste any rumours to gesse uppon. And here 
uppon hath soddenUe fallen out, by the cominge of Monsieur de Reaulx and his 
messuages, such an oiFence bothe towardes the Kinge for disapointinge of the 
intended purpose of Roan, and againste the Earle of Essex for his departure 
from the campe so longe a journey without her Majesties hcence, as at this 
present her Majesty resteth not only discontented but discomforted with all 
her actions intended by the goinge over of the Earle and her forces ; and 
wisheth with all her harte, thoughe it were to the loss of double the some of 
money spente therin, that she hadd never assented therto. And so may it 
appeare by the letters which she hath written bothe to the French Kinge and 

' Probably the 16th. 



60 [September, 

to the Earle, and like wise to Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. Killegrewe, of 
the which last letters her, pleasure is they should make you participant, and so 
I doubt not but they will ; wherin I perceive the greateste difEcultie wilbe to 
obtaine paiement of the Queens forces after the second moneth, wherunto I 
have moved her Majestie to be contente bothe because by the articles it is so 
covenanted that she should so permitt them, and for that also it would be a 
greate reproofe bothe in opinion of counsell and in verie deed also the cause 
if they should come away at the ende of the seconde monethe, considering one 
moneth is paste. And I doubt not that before halfe of the nexte moneth be 
spent, the seege will not be [be] gone ; and it greeveth me to thincke what 
comforte the enemie will take to see fortune to have so marked us, as with 
so great a charge to sende a nombre of such valliant persons to retoume as 
peaceablie as the[y] wente. 

After her Majestie had given the ambassador his answeare and her letters 
were written, Capten Bostocke wrote letters from the sea, declaringe that he 
had sett on land Sir Thomas Leighton the laste of August, and that he under- 
stood of an enterprise of the enemie with 2000 footemen and 1000 horse to 
intercepte the Earle cominge by Pontdelarche ; and as he writethe, you were so 
far acquainted therwith as that you staied Capten Turner there to bringe us 
newes of the success of the enterprise. But howe trewe his reporte is your 
selfe best knoweth ; and I trust within fewe dales or houres to understand 
more therof from you. And uppon occasion of his makinge mention of you. 
Her Majestie perceived that you were not yett recovered and gone from 
thence, and therfore commanded, after the signing of her letter to Sir Thomas 
Leighton, that you should be acquainted with all that she wrote unto them ; 
as uppon the sight of her letters you shall perceive. 

It is verie necessarie that we be advertised with speed whether you shall 
finde it likely that the Kinge shalbe able to paie our forces after the two 
monethes; for if that cannot be, we must hasten the sendinge of shipinge 
thither : for otherwise her Majesties charges will continewe longer then 
should content her. I assure you. Sir, at this present her Majestie is so 
deepely offended as I am perplexed what advice to geive, for I "am sharpley 
charged to have ben the principall furcherer in this voyage, and I cannot 
denye nor doe repente me of my counsell, thoughe I nowe wishe I had not so 
doune. And besides her Majesties offence towardes me, I am as much 
troubled with the infamie of the common fortune that hath overthrowne so 



A. D. 1591.] 61 

plausable an enterprise. You may please me if you wiU use the English stile, 
for so it is meete for all ministers of England to doe. From Lycheffeilde, 
the 6th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship's assured lovinge freinde, 

To the right honorable my very lovinge William Burleigh. 

freinde. Sir Henry U nton. Knight, her Ma- 
jesties ambassador with the French Kinge. 



XXXVII. 



1591, 

6 Sept. " From the Earl of Essex to Sir Henry Unton." ' 

Sir, This Messenger, by whom I 

that came from Englande, had bin yesterday dispatch 
that I was sodaynlie overtaken with a fitt of an ague 
for the space of twelve houres, and hath cawsed us t 
marche untyU this present time : But now I finde 
so good state, and so well amended, that I hope it will 
one dayes fever ; so as this night I meane to go . 

and lodge at a place called Pavilley, and afterward 
my journey along the river of Sene, with purpose t 
Villiers abowte Cawdebecke, or Feskam, or some oth 
amiddest his owne garrisons. 

As soone as I 
more ease, and better disposed to write, I will dispa 
Darcey for Englande, by whom I will give your Lordship 
knowledge of oure proceedinge, and send a convoye 
while, I wishe your Lordship perfect recoverie of your 
strength, and assure yow of my best affection m 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. iCo. 



62 [September, 



fourmance of all offices of frendshippe betweene us 
the 6 of September, 1591. 

Your Lordships very 
The L. Ambassadore. R. Essex. 

My Honorable frend Sir Henrie 
Unton, Knight, Lorde Ambassadore 
resident for her Ma*'' in Fraunce. 



XXXVIII. 



1591, 

6 Sept ? " Letter from Sir Henry Unton to Sir Robert Cecyl." i 

both together 
the 5, the other of the 11*'' of Augu[st] 
were sent me from the campe ... 

I marvelled ; notwithstandinge my . . . . 

you for the same is increased, and I ... 

justly confesse that you owe me int . 

which sheweth your honorable disposytion and 
continuance of your favor, which I protest, is m 
comfort. 

Your greatnes and accesse to her Majestic dot[h to-] 
tely bynde me to you, for you loose noe o[pportunity] 
to grace me both with her Majestie and my Lord yo[ur father ;] 
and I fynd the fruites to my noe small [encou-] 
ragement, besydes the continuaU favor [which it] 
pleaseth you to vouchesafe me in the ad . , . 

of the well takinge of my services, and [also in] 
advisinge me how to please ; which I h[umbly] 
beeceeche you to continew, and for the which I [shall] 
ever honore and serve you duly. 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 424. This letter was probably written on 6 Septem- 
ber 1591. 



A. D. 1591.] 63 

I protest I have advertised my L. Chanc[ellor] 
of your thankefiillnes towardes him, and 

honorable regarde of me for his sake .... 

I dayly tast to my great bennefytt, and 
dowte not his Lordships due acknowledgeme 
ther for him selfe and my poore selfe 

My letters to my noble Lord Treasurer as I sp . 
your trowble in dowblinge my newes 
most commonly are not worth your reading 
and Ottwell Smyth is as good an intellig[en]- 
cor as my selfe. 

The advertisement I receave in theise your letters 
lastly receaved, of my Lord Generalls favo[ura]ble and honorable report of me 
doth bringe me noe small contentment, which I will honestly deserve and make 
knowen to his Lordship as from you. My Lord Treasurer doth wTyte in his 
last letter to me that he marvelled I did noe oftener advertise of our proceed- 
inge ; yf yt please you to vue my letters, I have not fayled every sennyght to 
send a pacquet ; but my Lord Generalls want of writynge doth make myne 
the more expected. His Lordship, I assure you, was so ingaged and layed 
for by the ennemy as hee durst not retome, neyther was able without all his 
forces. 

His Lordship was sycke of a sharpe fjtt of fever, which hee hopeth will bee 
able [sic] ; but this * * * * * * will searche him as it hath done very many, and 
this towne keape me very weake without encrease of strencth, for which cause I 
depart hence within 2 or 3 dayes to the campe, so to . . . where all . . 
. councell will bee, and I acquaynt my selfe with the Frenche cause . . . 
will not trouble your Lordship with my idle discourse, but beeseche God to 

grant health and . . . contentment and to make me 

worthy of your honorable favor ... I humbly take my leave. 

. . . . crave yo' Lordship pardon 
for not wry ting . . . my owne 
hand, being, I protest, not able as 
yeat. 



64 [September, 



XXXIX. 

1591, 

6 Sept. " Letter from Sir Henry Unton to . . . . " ^ 

My honorable good cosen ; your letter of the 13 of August I receaved 16*, 
two of Sir Robert CecyUes this 6 of September, other from you I have had 
none sience my beinge he[re] . 

And yf eyther of them had come sooner 
I wold not have beene so badd a p 
By your letter I perceave your trew ky[ndness] 

for the which I will not bee in your debt a . . . 

with my best meanes will ..... 

my selfe. 

The extremitie and lencth of my spckness] 
must excuse my negligence .... 

want of due remembrance of [you ; ] 
and I protest to you that as yeat I [am] 
not able to wryte no lynes with my [own] 
hand legible ; my weaknes is as yet su . 

beyt myselfe in a manner recovere . ... 

and free from disease, and my phisitione [telleth] 
me that changde of ayer will br[ing] 
my owld strencth, for which cause I . 

within 2 or 3 dayes to the campe an . . . 

to some good towne towardes the .... 

My Lord generall hath had one .... 

fytt of an ague, but feareth noe m . . , . 

I pray God may so fall out. His Lo[rdship] 
geven me very honorable good usadge 
Other newes wee have none heare [worth] 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 424, b. This letter is without date, but was written 
6 September, 1591. 



A. D, 1591.] 65 

the wrytinge ; for this towne is but 
such as yt yealdeth of noe credi 
I thanke you exceedinge for advertis 
. her Majesties good health and ca . 



XL. 

1591, 

7 Sept. "To the Lord Threasurer ; by Cooke the Pursevante."' 

My very good Lorde. Your Lordships last letter of the second ^ herof I 
receaved yesternight late, and am verry ^ sorry to finde myne sente by John 
de Vignes* were not come to your Lordships handes, wherby your Lordship 
mighte have had better knowledge of the proceadinges here ; by the which, I 
hope, it wilbe founde that I have omitted noe diUigence to performe that duty 
which apperteineth to me to give your Lordship true advertisement of all my 
knowledge. And I assure your Lordship, I could not have written oftener, 
unlesse I should have made my letters not wourthe the carryage and your 
Lordship's viewe. The Kinge beinge in Champaigny so farr distant from us 
here, and his aboade so uncertaine, as together with the danger of the passage 
he is verie hardly to be found ; for two of our messengers which were dispatched 
hence have miscarryed, and yett I have sente awaie a thirde, by whome I 
hope shortelie to receave answeare for her Majesties satisfaction. 

I am verie sorie that the Kinges crosse proceadinges and Monsieur de 
Reaulx negociations have bredd in her Majestic so great discontentment and 
imquiettness, and not without juste cause of oflFence; which I have not failed, 
accordinge to your Lordships former instructions, to intymate to the Kinge and 
his counsell : wherof I expecte some better eflfectes and reformation of his 
errors, to her Majesties better comforte. 

&gt; The original draft corrected by Unton is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 426 ; 
the original letter itaelf is in the State Paper Office. 

' In the Bodl. transcript this date is inaccurately written the 6th. 
' Here begins the draft in the Cottonian volume. 
* That namely, written on 3 1 August. 

K 



66 [September, 

And touchinge the pointes of her Highness letters to Sir Thomas Leighton 
and Mr, Killegrewe, which your Lordship signifieth her Majestie willeth 
shalbe communicated with me ; by reason of our seperation I cannot as yett 
conferr with them therof, but doe hope within two or three daies to take 
my journey towardes the Lord Generall, and then to advise with them 
therin. 

For the Kinges possibihtie to paie her Majesties forces after the expiration 
of the two monethes, I have therin conferred with Monsieur Saldagne, one of 
the chiefe of the fynances, who hath written this daye to Monsieur Do, super- 
intendant of all the Kinges finances, by whom he will assuredly better under- 
stand the state of the Kinge. And in his opinion, he thincketh the Kinge 
wilbe able to make paiement ; making computation that he thincketh the same 
doth not exceed above 12,000 crownes a moneth. This is as much as I could 
learne by him hereof; but he assureth me some better knowledge, uppon 
answeare of his letters. 

Of the matters advertised by Capten Bostocke I hope my last letters have 
fully satisfyed your Lordship therein, wherin the desseinges of the enemie not 
answearinge his Lordships expectation, he hath sithence taken his journey 
alonge the ryver of Sene with purpose to busie Monsieur Villars ' amiddest 
his owne garrison, and especially to beseege Feckam ; of the intention wherof 
her Majestie shalbe with in two daies better advertised by Mr. Darcy, whom 
his Lordship is in hande to dispatch. 

His Lordship writeth unto me that he hath endured a verie sharpe fitt of 
an ague or feavor, but that after the same he founde him selfe so well as he 
hopeth to have noe more feelinge therof, that it will proove but a dyarium. 

The Marshall of Byron is ingaged as yett before a verie stronge castell called 
Pierre Font, near Noyon, which was promised to be rendered to the Kinge, 
but hath held out contrary to promise ; which notwithstandinge, he hopeth 
shortely to carrye awaye wAh. the spade and mynes, for it is hard[l]ie other- 
wise prennable, by which means he hath deceaved my Lord Generall expecta- 
tion, promising his Lordship within 10 or 12 daies to joine their forces 
together. But it is here given out that the Marshall will raise his seege rather 
than continewe much longer aboute it. 

I moste humbly thancke your Lordship for the paines it pleaseth you to 
take in bestowinge on me so many lines of your owne hande writinge, 

1 In the margin Burghley has written, "Bleyvile 5 leagues from Roan and 6 from Pont deLaron." 



A. D. 1591.J 67 

together with the good advise that it dothe importe, which my poore service 
shall never faUe in his beste meassure to deserve. 

Althoughe I am farr from the estate of a stronge man, yett do I resolve 
within these 2 or 3 dales to take my journey towardes my Lord Generall, 
attendinge only a convoy for his Lordship for my departure, which I doe 
daylie expecte. My disease came a horse backe and goeth away a foote, and 
this ayre is so contrary to my health as my phisitions perswade me I shall 
hardely here recover my strength, and therefore resolve to stale some tyme at 
the campe, and so take my journey to Louviers, within three leagues of Pont 
de Larch, where the Kinges counsell and the cardinalls are required to make 
their aboade, by which meanes I shall have some better advertisementes and 
understand by conference the French proceadinges ; for here we have but the 
reliques, and scarce assurance of anie thinge ; and I shall the sooner repaire to 
the Kinge, when he draweth near those partes. 

Your Lordships pacquett, sent by this your Lordships messanger, I conveyed 
with all speed and some hazard to my Lord Generall ; which his Lordship 
advertiseth me he hatha receaved, and wherof he will by Mr. Darcy send 
present answeare. After my departure from hence I shall not be able to 
advertise your Lordship as heretofore ; for the messengers dayUe miscarry and 
are verie chargable to me ; not withstanding I will not faile to do my dutye, 
as any speciall occasions or matter shalbe presented. I wiU herafter observe 
your will for the date of my letters after the EngUshe style. And soe I 
humblie take my leave. From Deep, the 7th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship's to command, 

Henry Unton. 

Even as I was closing my letter, newes is come hither of the taking of 
Pierrefont by the Marshall of Biron by composition, which I dare not creditt; 
albeit Mons' Saldaigne and the better sort here doe believe it.' 



■ This postscript is found neither in the draft nor the Bodleian transcript. 



68 [September, 



XLI. 



1591, "To the Lord Threasurer ; the 13th of September, 

13 Sept. by Mr. Smythe." i 

My very good Lord. Accordinge to her Majesties pleasure and your Lord- 
ship's letters. Sir Thomas Leighton, Mr. Killegrewe, and my selfe have con- 
ferred uppon the contentes * of her Majesties letters sent to them ; wherin her 
Highnes signifieth her resolution of revocation of her forces at the expiration 
of the two monethes, if the French Kinge make not pay weekely ; wherof we 
are required to enforme ourselves ; and that if pay be made accordinglie, then 
they to continewe only for a moneth or fortie daies longer, and but for the 
seege of Roan. 

Concerninge the Kinges abillitie to paie, I have advertised your Lordship of 
some possibilitie in my laste letters, if the Kinge may be brought there unto. 
Other meanes Saldagne ^ knoweth non, untill he receave answeare of his letters 
to Monsieur Do,* which he expecteth shortelie, for his letters were dispatched 
the very dale of my receipt of your Lordship's last ; and we will procure the 
best assurance we can that they maie not be deceaved. 

To the other pointe of her Majesties letters, that if the forces were well 
paied they should contynewe fortie daies ^ and noe longer; geve me leave, I 
humblie beseeche your Lordship, to deliver my poore opinion by the way of 
discourse ; which is that the seege is like to continewe much longer, ^ and the 
wante of our forces would overthrowe the whole action, and the Kinge in his 
estate beinge only houlden upp by her Majesties gracious favor. 

I am much greived that the Kinge hath ben so unregardfuU of her Majes- 
ties extraordinary and princely favours; yet we all hope that her Majesty in 
her providence will not forsake so generall a cause by untymely revocation 
of her forces, which will quail the Reiters, discoxu-age the Kinge and his good 
subjects, that her Majestic hath soe lefte him, and so animate the enemie as 
he will growe insolent and victorious; besides the dishonor to my Lord 

&gt; The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office; a copy occurs in the Cott. MS. Calig. 
E. viii. fol. 428. ^ Here begins the copy contained in the Cottonian MS. 

3 Saldagne. [in margin.] • Mons. Do. [in margin.] ' 40 dayes. [in margin.] 

^ The sege longer than 40 dayes. [in margin.] 



A. D. 1591,] 69 

Generall and our whole nation to depart without action, and when the 
greatest enterprises are in hande. 

It hathe pleased my Lord Generall to imparte unto me howe her Majestie 
is highely displeased with him for his journey to the Kinge and for his 
employment of our forces, and that her Highness will revoke him, (though 
the forces continewe.) at the two monethes ende. I protest unto your Lord- 
ship, uppon the duty and alleageance I owe to her Majesty, that he is the most 
perplexed and afflicted man that I did ever knowe, and hath taken such an 
impression of her Majesties disgrace and the losse of his brother,^ that he 
will hardly recover it. And if this dishoner should happen to him to be 
called untimely home, he were never able to indure it ; for the verie conceipt 
therof, and cheifly of her Majesties indignation, have already wrought the 
strangest alteration in his body and minde that ever I knewe in any in soe 
shorte a tyme. Wherefore out of my duty, I am bounde to lett your Lordship 
knowe thus much, and humblie to crave for the wourthiness of so honorable 
a personadge, and the good that my countrey is like to reape by him, that 
your Lordship will by your honorable mediation obteine her Majesties favor, 
and some better comforte from her princely hande, which only can relieve 
him and further our actions here and the service of her Majestie greatly; for 
his Lordship carrieth him seUe here with greate honor and discreete govern- 
ment, and the extraordinary good opinion of his souldiers. 

The Marshall of Byron is come to Gaily Fountaine, ' within three leagues 
of Neuf Chastell, ^ pourposely to conferr with my Lord, and, as we conceave, 
to drawe all their forces together to make some aproach to Roan, and to take 
the places of importance which will annoy the seige, free the passage that 
theire victuell male come to the campe safelie, and therby also to take away all 
place of retreate of the enemie, who ells will in a manner beseige the Kinge 
when he is before Roan. The chiefest is Goumay, * which cannot, as they 
sale, hould out tene dales. The other Caudebeck. ^ My Lord Generall in- 
tendeth to goe to Neuf Chastell to conferr with the Marshall, and then to take 
the beste course. This place is infected with the plague verie much, and 
their the souldiers shall live better upon the enemie, wheras here he liveth 
uppon his paie at hard rates this moneth. My Lord, the rather to bestowe 

1 Walter was the name of the Earl's brother, see Dugdale's Baron, ii. 179 ; Camd. Elizab. ii. 33. 
3 Galle Funteyn. [in margin.] ' Neuf Chastel. [in margin.] 

* Goumay. [in margin.] * Caudibeck. [in margin.] 



70 [September, 

his forces in those partes I purpose to attende his Lordship this journey, and 
so to Loviersj' accordinge to my laste to your Lordship. 

We have credible advise that the Kinge is joyned^ with the Reiters at 
Sedan or there aboutes, in the Duke of Bouillion's countrie, and marcheth 
towardes us with all dilligence to the seege of Roan, which wilbe by the ende 
of this monethe. 

Other advisementes I have none wourthei your Lordship, for this place is 
barren of newes ; wherfore I will not longer interrupte your Lordship's 
waightie affaires, but crave pardon for my bouldness and plaine dealinge. And 
soe I humblie take my leave, beseechinge God to grawnte your Lordship all 
trewe contentement and encrease of honor. 

From Deepe, the 13* of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship's to command, 

Henry Unton. 

I humblie beseech your L. that you wilbe 

pleased to remember my former suite made 
unto you for lycence to transporte hyther 
any necessarie provisions, according to the 
benefitt of her Maj'' transporte, wherein I 
have appointed a servant of myn to attend 
your Lordship.* 



XLIL 
1591, 

13 Sept. " From the Lord Threasurer ; the l7th, by 

John Simons." * 

My Lord Ambassador. Your last letters are from Deepe, of the 7 of this 
monethe f by the which it appeareth that Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. Kil- 

' Loryurs. 

' He left Noyon for the purpose on Sunday 15th September, according to the French style; and on 
the Sunday following he reviewed them. These troops consisted of 5,000 horse and 11,000 foot. See 
L'Etoile, 1. 144, 146. ' This postscript is not found in in the Bodleian copy. 

* The original letter is preserved in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 30. See also Rymer's Feed, 
xvi. 120. 3 In the Bodl. MS. the 17th, erroneously. 



A. D. 1591.J 71 

legrewe beinge absent from you was the cause you could not be made partakere 
of her Majesties letters, sent to them with intention to make you acquainted 
therwith. But I hope by your departure from Deepe you have ben bothe 
acquainted therwith, and have also made some answeare to her Majestie ; 
which is not yett come, but is daiUe looked for. Her Majestie, accordinge to 
the contente of those letters, for lacke of answeare from thence, hath newely 
commanded us to write a common letter directed to the Earle of Essex, your 
selfe, Sir Thomas Leighton, and Mr. KiUegrewe; to the contentes wherof I 
doe referr you, lackinge leisure to write to you of anie other matter, exp'ectinge 
nowe to heare from you daylie of the sundrey accidentes that may happen, wher- 
of we have heare advertisments, as it were in a heape altogether ; but you thear 
shall heare of them by peecemeale. We do heare that the Italian armye of 
the Popes should be entered into the French countrey of Burgondy, which I 
doe skantly beleeve ; and that the duke of Parma would enter into France by 
the xx"" of this moneth, which I thincke he cannot doe by the continewance of 
the mutinies of the Spaniardes not yett pacified ; and of a late massacre 
intended by them of the castels of Antwerpe, where Mandagron commandeth, 
and of Gaunte, to have sacked the whole townes ; which having ben intended 
and not effected, breedeth such a generall dislike of them in the countrey, 
as I have cause to doubte that the duke of Parma cannot expedit him selfe 
from thence. 

We heare also that thear hath ben a conflict betweene the duke Mercure and 
the prince D'ombes in Brittaigne, and that the duke hath ben forced to fly 
with the losse of fyfe hundred Spaniardes, ' but to encounter that fortune we 
heare that ther be newe nombers arrived in Brettaigne. 

As to the possibilite certified by you of the Kinges power to paie our forces 
after the ende of two monethes, I wishe the hope you have therof might fall to 
be well proved indeed. For then, as you shall see by the letters nowe sente 
to the Earle of Essex, and you, and others, her Majestie may be induced, 
contrary to her owne inclination, to contynewe her forces there somme longer 
tyme, only for the matters of Roan and Newhaven. 

And 2 so beinge distracted by many other causes for her Majestie, without 
any jott of leisure to himte or see huntinge occupation for a progress, I am 
forced to end. 

' Spaniardes not yett pacified. Bodl. MS 

' The conclusion of the letter, together with the postscript are in Burghley's hand. 



72 [September, 

From the Court at Sir Henery Wallopes, neare Basinge, the 13th of Sep- 
tember, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freinde, 

Postscript, W. BURGHLEY. 

My Lord Chancellor was looked for tomorrowe 
at Basinge ; but I doubte he will not come but to 
Oate landes, about the 22th of this moneth. 

To my verie lovinge friende. Sir Henry Unton, 
knight. Her Majesties Ambassador in France. 



XLHI. 

1591, 

13 Sept. " From the Lordes of the Counsell to the Lord Generall, my 
selfe, and Sir Thomas Leighton, and Mr. Killegrewe ; by 
John Symons the post, receaved the l7th."i 

After our right hartye commendacions to your Lordship and the rest. We 
have receaved your Letters written at Pont de Larche, the seconde of this 
monethe, which came to us at the same tyme that other your letters, beinge 
written the 17th of the same monethe at the campe of Pavyelle [sent by 
Francis Darcy.] And for answeare to your former letters, directed to us in 
generall, we have imparted the contents therof to her Majestic, whoe uppon 
consideration of all the partes of the same and of manie other circumstances 
[knowne to her Majestic,] which have happened sithence your departure 
out of this realme, farre contrary to her expectation, and greatilie to her mis- 
likinge, she hathe made resolution, and hath commanded us with speede to 
signifie the same to your Lordship for so much as shall answeare to your 
private letter and directe you, the ambassador, Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. 
Killegrewe, accordinge to the truste reposed in you, to performe that which 
you shall perceive by theise our letters [to be by you accomplished.] 

First, you, the Earle, shall understand that her Majestic findeth no good 

' Orig. draft in the State Paper Office, corrected by Burghley, whose alterations are here printed 
within braclcets. 



A. D. 1591.] 73 

success of [this] your voyage thither ; [for to beginne] with your departure to 
the Kinge, beinge in so farre remote countreys, not without danger bothe of 
passage and retoume, as hath [well] appeared, though you had ben provoked 
ther unto by the Kinge ; [yett yor] leavinge the arraye without any head or 
martiall, and none ells but a Serjant Major, her Majestic dothe greatly 
dislike such an enterprise, which shee accompteth [an undutifull acte of yours.] 
But when her Majestic perceaved by the French Kinges owne letters unto her 
that he had no meaninge [of him selfe] to sende for you [to come from your 
armye,] but [yett] accepted your journey as a voUuntary action of your owne, 
which he tooke the more thanckftilly ; her Majestie therfore doth the more 
condempne you [here of] a rashenes, and further more thincketh that the 
government committed to you hathe ben evill disposed, in that your selfe 
knowinge the purpose of this voyage to have ben only to have ayded the 
Kinge for the recovery of Roan [and New Haven,] and that her Majestie hath 
contracted for the [paiement] of her forces but for the space of two monethes 
from the tyme of their arryvall, which was the seconde of Auguste, you have 
[already idley] spent on moneth and odd dales in [this] your privatt journey 
before you came to your forces againe, and yett in that tyme you were forced 
to have them come to meete you, or other wise such an unadvised journey 
you did take as is not knowen how longe it might have ben befor you could 
[with saflFety] have come to them, if they had not adventured to have come to 
you. And in that action also her Majestie findeth a greate oversight in you 
that you would come so neare Roan, and there to make [a] bravado uppon the 
enemy in sight of the towne, where, to your owne greatest losse, as a reward 
of your unadvisedness, you lost your only brother [and putt in danger divers 
others.] 

And where in the rest of your letter you make reporte what [was] concluded 
when you were with the Kinge, that he will satisfye her Majestie for the seege 
of Roan, and that the Marshall de Byron should [followe] with his whole 
armye to joine with her Majesties forces under your rule ; and yett [at the 
same time you did see] the Kinge meante him seUe to goe [backe from thence] 
to Champanny with 3000 gentlemen and 3O00 harquebusiers to meete the Ger- 
mayne army, and that if the marshall Byron kepte his wourde [with you,] you 
[would invest] Roan by the fifteenth of this monethe, and by the 25th the 
Kinge and his Almans [shoulde be] their, before which tyme you would make 
your approches and trenches, and then you hoped within eight dales to be in 

L 



74 [September, 

Roan, — her Majestic [uppon repetition of all those thinges] iindeth many 
causes to mislike [therof, and speciallie of] your reporte of the Kinge and the 
Marshall, [notinge] greate lacke in your judgment, to make an accompte to 
enter into Roan, [a towne so well fortified,] within eight dales after your 
approches and trenches made. And though we will not fill our letter with 
the multitude of the causes of her Majesties mislikinges, yett in some parte 
you shall understande that her Majestie can noe way finde it likely that the 
French Kinge can possible [perfourme] these actions for the time that you 
came from him first to goe into Champagny [to meets and view the army ;] 
and that to devyde [and distribute] the army into sundry countries, part to 
be with the Marshall D'omont in Burgondi, and another portion to be sente 
into Brettaigne, the furthest parte of all the French dominions from Cham- 
pagny, and the thirde parte to bringe with him selfe to the seege of Roan, or 
fight with the duke of Parma, all which things to be donne with that speed 
as to come to the seege of Roan the fyve and twentie of this monethe (as 
you write) is so farre incredible as she marveiUeth that either your selfe 
would thincke it likelie or couldbe perswaded by others [to make reporte 
therof.] 

And as to the cominge of the Marshall Byron to followe you in such sorte 
as he might be with you by the fifteenth of this moneth to invest Roan, her 
Majestie marvailleth that you [should] write thus, when yor selfe, before your 
writinge, did understand that to stale his journey he [had] attempted the seege 
of Pierrefont ; which not findings faisible, he left it, when in wisdome and 
honor, (if he had meant to have come to Roan with such speed as he promised,) 
he ought not have attempted that enterprise. And thoughe you write that he 
should come away with the whole army that was at Noyon, by his letter to 
your selfe he saieth that the Kinge hath commanded him to sende all his 
horsemen backe to him, [so as he could not bringe the whole armye.] And 
besides this, as it seemeth, you are not ignorant that he intendeth to beseege 
[by the way] a place called Gournay, before he come to you. And manie 
[other] imperfections [are noted by her Majestie] in his letter to you, express- 
inge noe time certaine when he shall come, but with wourdes [of hopinge and 
beleevinge] to come, " et en peu de jours ;" [neither doth he] make [anie] more 
certeine mention to you of the Kinges cominge; so as for conclusion, her 
Majestie findeth your accompt of investinge, your intrenchinge and enteringe 
into Roan, all imperfecte. 



A. D. 1591.] 75 

And yett if the Marshalls comiiige and the Kinges [after him might be 
performed] by the 25th, yet her Majestie marvailleth you keepe noe better 
accompte [or remembraimce] of the tyme lymmitted for yom- selves and your 
forces, which by her Majestie have ben appointed to continewe [in her pay] 
no longer ther then for two monethes, and yett for any service which the 
French Kinge there wotdd falle out but for on daye. And of this absurditie 
her Majestie marvaileth you had not consideration when you wrote these your 
letters. 

And therefore consideringe howe untowardhe all this action hath fallen out 
under your government, [and not nowe to be performed, as was first meant,] 
she is resolved that you shall retoume att the ende of the two monethes, 
accordinge as was from the beginninge accorded between her Majestie and the 
French Kinge. And so also her disposition is that her forces shalbe retoumed 
at the same tyme, as hereof both you the Earle, and you the Ambassador, and 
Mr. Leighton, and Killegrewe, have been by letters of the seconde of this 
moneth [fuUy] advertised ; and yett never the lesse, as well to repeate her 
Majesties former advertisement to you, as to explaine the same at more length, 
because shee hath yet noe answear from you, her Majesties pleasure is that 
if it shall appeare unto you probably that the continewance of some parte of 
her Majesties forces to be joyned with the Kinges, for one or two monethes 
more, male recover either Roan or New Haven, and that also you shall gett 
and have good assurance for the paiement of such of the English forces 
as the Kinge shall require [in sorte] as her Majestie [dothe weekely and 
accustomably] paie them, then her Majestie uppon your advertisement [for 
assurance therof ] wilbe contented that some parte of her forces, but not all, ' 
shall remaine for a monethe or two only, to recover Roan or Newhaven, and 
to no other purpose. And herof we require you most earnestly to have 
speedy consideration, for that we may thereby knowe what quantitie of ship- 
pinge shalbe needful to be sente to bringe away the whole forces, or such 
parte therof, accordinge as her Majestie shall assent unto, and the Frenche 
Kinge request. And yett this doubt we must add, as proceedinge from her 
Majestie, that she thinketh it verie harde to come to any perfect resolution 
either for the certainty of the payment or for the Kinges minde to be knowen 
herin, consideringe he is so ferr distant from those quarters firom whence (as 

* " wilbe contented that some parte of her forces, but not all." These words necessary to complete 
the sense are omitted in the Bodl. MS. 



76 [September, 

her Majestie understandeth) the dangers of messengers are so great [to be 
sent to goe and retourne.] And ' so not doubtinge of your care and diligence 
herin to be used, we bid you hartily farewell. From the Court at Farley, 
the 13th of September, 1591. 

Your verie lovinge frendes, 

William Bubghley. Charles Howard. 

Hen. Hunsdon. Tho. Heneage. 

Robert Cbcyll. Jo. Wolley. 



XLIV. 

1591, 

13 Sept. " To the Lord Chancelor ; by my Servant Joanas." ^ 

My singular good Lord, I have receaved, to my no smale comforte, your 
Lordship's letter of the 5th of this moneth,* whereby I finde a * most honorable 
constant contynuance of your Lordship's favor and goodness towardes me ; 
the which albeit, I confesse, my best service can never meritt, yet I beseech 
your Lordship to geive me leave to assure you that no man shalbe more 
wourthy therof in his love and trewe duty towardes your Lordship then I 
wilbe ; and will not faile, while I live, to acknowledge my selfe (as I have all 
cause,) whoUie and only your Lordship's most bounden creature. And as it 
comforteth me to heare from your Lordship above all men in the worlde, so 
I protest unto your Lordship, the same hath nowe greately revived me in the 
contentation I have receaved thereby. 

Touchinge the manner of my sickness, wherof your Lordship's pleasure is 
to be advertised, it may please your Lordship to understande that the same 
was a most violent continuall burninge feaver, without intermission, accom- 
panied also with the yeallowe janders, which with the extremetie therof did so 
mightely oppresse and weaken me as the phisitions them selves have sithence 

' The draft proceeds no further; the remainder is transcribed from the Bodl. MS. 

2 The original draft, corrected by Unton, is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol 438. 

^ See No. XXXV. ■• Here commences the Cottonian draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 77 

confessed, they did much dispaire of me.i Now I thancke God, by the good 
care of my Lord Generall's phisitions and Mr. Jeffrey, whom I brought over 
with me, I have gained my health, but not my strengthe, for I remaine yett 
very weake, and doe intende to take my journey in companie with my Lord 
General! to Neuf ChasteU, and from thence towardes Louviers, seven leagues 
beyond Roan, whether the Kinges counsel! will make thear aboade, for the 
recoverie therof, with the helpe of a better ayre : the unholesoraenes of this 
place not sufferinge me here to encrease the same. So as wantinge nothinge 
ells but strengthe, I shall not nowe need, I most humblie thancke your 
Lordship, further helpe. 

Sir Robert CecyU doth make me greatelie bounde to him for his dayly 
letters of her Majesties good acceptance of my poore service ; the whiche beinge 
dearer for yoiu- Lordships sake, I humblie beseech your Lordship to take 
notice and knowledge therof, as from me, which may benefitt me, and I know 
he expecteth the same, for he protesteth much towardes me only for your 
Lordship.'^ 

The cause of my Lord Generall's goinge to Neuf Chastell is to conferr 
with the Marshall of Byron, who hath sente to him to that ende, beinge come 
to Gaily Fountayne, within three leagues therof. ^Vnd as we doe conceave, 
it is to move my Lord to joyne with him in the clearinge of some important 
places which would annoye the seege of Roan, by stoppinge the passage of 
victuells to the campe and other wise distresse the same. The cheefest is 
Gournay, which cannot, as the[y] say, hold out tenn daies, and the other 
Caudebeck. 

His Lordship is at this tyme mightelie afflicted in mynde with sorrowe for 
her Majesties displeasure conceaved againste him, and the unhappie accydent 
of his brothers death, wherof I doubte not your Lordship hath longe before 
this tyme heard, which I assure your Lordship, hath bread in him a greate 
alteration. 

We are credibly advertised that the Kinge is joyned with the Reiters at 
Sedan or ther aboutes, in the Duke of Bouillons country, and that he hasteneth 

' I fell into the same [as I] conceave by accompanying the Lord General] ... at what time I stirred 
my boddie extraordinarily] on horsebacke, being a dale of exceeding great heate ; wheruppon fol- 
lowed that night my distemperament. Cott. draft, but struck through by Unton, and not inserted in 
the Bodleian transcript. 

' The greater part of this paragraph is in Unton's own hand in the draft. 



78 [September, 

heither wardes with them with all speed he can for the seege of Roan ; wher 
with he wilbe readie to goe in hand by the latter end of this moneth. 

This is all which for the present I have to trouble your Lordship with all. 
And so beseechinge your Lordship to contynue still towardes me your honor- 
able goodness, which I doe constantly beleive and doe only on the same repose 
my selfe, I moste humbly take my leave with my prayers to Almightie God 
for your Lordships longe lief with health and happiest contentment. From 
Deep, the 13th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship's most humblie at commandment, 

Henby Unton. 



XLV. 

1591, 

18 Sept. " To the Lordes of the Counsell from my selfe. Sir Thomas 
Leighton and Mr. KiUegrew ; sent by Painter, the mes- 
senger." 1 

May it please your Lordships. Your Lordshippes letters of the 13th of 
this moneth, directed to the Lord Generall and us, we receaved the l7th of 
this moneth -^ the moste parte therof conteyneth her Majesties dislike and par- 
ticular reprehensions of his Lordships proceedings ; the rest declareth her 
Highness resolution of revocation of his Lordship and of her Majesties forces 
at the ende of the two monethes almoste expired ; albeitt with this addition, 
that if we finde probabiUitye of the takinge of Roan or Newhaven, and male 
obteyne good assurance of the Frenche Kinge for the souldiers weekely and 
accustomable paiements, then, uppon such our advertisement therof, her Ma- 
jestic wilbe pleased to contynewe some parte of her saied forces which the 
Kinge shall requeste, but not aU, for a raonethe or two longer. 

Concerninge the objections againste his Lordship in the carriadge of him 
selfe here since his cominge, hee is pleased to make his owne justification and 

' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office ; the draft, in Union's handwriting may 
be seen in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 434. A few marginal notes have been added to the 
former by Lord Burghley, which, though of no great moment, are here printed, 

2 See No. XLIII. 



A. D. 1591.J 79 

answeare by his privatt letter to your Lordships, hopinge hereby to geve your 
Lordships and by you, her Majestie, some manner of satisfaction and answear ; 
albeit his mynde be verie greatly perplexed with this encrease of affliction, 
wherof he hath receaved too deepe impression : but we leave his Lordship to 
his owne letters and your Lordships due consideration. 

Of that which importeth us ; we doe with all humblenes and dutey receive 
her Majesties commandments, and youj Lordships, as becometh us, and with 
all due obedience wiU perfourme what we are required ; ' but before the 
Kinges retoume we cannot certenly advertise your Lordships or her Majestie 
either of assurance of pay for the forces, or of the probabillitie of takinge 
Roan or New haven, albeit the Marshall Byron and all the men of warre and 
judgment with him doe holde Roan to be prennable, neither can we knowe 
what kinde or nombers of her Majesties forces the Kinge will require, or what 
proportion of shippinge may serve to transporte the rest which her Majestie 
wilbe pleased to revoake, untill our conference with the Kinge. Notwith- 
standinge my Lord Generall, I, Henery Unton, and Tliomas Leighton, have 
had conference with the Marshall Byron, the Kinges secretary Forgett,^ and 
some other of his counsel! at NeufChastell, conceminge the weekly paye, and 
the same do assure us therof, as a matter alreadie consulted and agreed uppon 
amonste them before, accordinge to the contracte. But the true assurance 
therof cannot procead but from the Kinge. We objected to the not per- 
formance of promises made to my Lord Willoughby for pay of her Majesties 
forces under his conductes, and therfore required some stricte assurance for 
their pay; wherunto the Marshall answeared he could give no other then 
wourdes, but desired us not to doubte but they should be satisfyed, and that 
the Kinge at his retoume would contente bothe us to our hkinges, and yeald 
to her Majesties will in that, and all thinges ells what soever.^ 

We are putt in hope by the Marshall of the Kinges retoume * with all diUi- 
gence by the end of the moneth, and of his comminge to the seege of Roan 
with all his armye, for it is 4 or 5 dayes since he was at ChaUons in Cham- 
paigny with the Reisters,* as by letters to the Marshall from the Kinge 
appeared, which is not from Paris 40 leagues. 

• An answer for assurance of money for numbers to be required for shippinge. [marginal note.] 
^ Byron, Forggett. [marginal note.] 

' Byrons wordes for payment, [marginal note.] 

* The K. retorn with 7 w. [marginal note.] ' The K. at Challons with the reytors. [marginal note.] 



80 [September, 

It pleased her Majestic here tofore to write her most gracious letters to us, 
Thomas Leighton and Henery Killegrewe,i concerninge those same pointes 
conteyned in your Lordships letter, as well for the revocation of my Lord 
Generall and of her Majesties forces, at the two monethes ende, as for the 
conditional! contynuance of some parte of them, if fitt assurance might be 
geven for their weekely paye ; wher unto we have delivered our poore opinions 
and have made the like answeare therin ; which we nowe presume againe in 
parte to signify to your Lordships with my Lord Ambassador, and we all 
crave your Lordships pardon for this our bouldness, and favorable construc- 
tion of oure plaine meaninge. 

The callinge away of my Lord Generall from his forces will greately dis- 
honor his Lordship amonge many nations, for if his Lordship departe, and 
when the enterprise dothe but beginne, they wiU either condemne his Lord- 
ship of wante of coradge or wante of government, and therfore recalled,^ or else 
holde him a man disgraced in her Majesties favor for lacke of loyallty, and 
therfore not suffered to continewe ; which, what it will wourke in his mynde, 
and hathe done, we have greate cause to feare and lament, and wishe it were 
well knowen to your Lordships, that it might receive the better belief. 

The conveniences that would growe to the service hereby is very greate, for 
his Lordship hath entertained a greate number of her Majesties best captens 
upon his owne purse, who have no other charge, but come as voluntaries. 
Theise will depart with him and manie other of his followers will not stay wil- 
lingly behinde him to be commanded by any other.^ 

Howe the other auxilliaries will conceive of his Lordships departure, and of 
her Majesties princely affection towardes the Kinge in callinge home the Lord 
Generall whom it hath pleased her so much to favor, and in respect therof and 
of his owne worthiness is reported as greate countenance to the Kinge as the 
whole armye ; how much this will amate them and disgrace the Kinge, we 
leave to your Lordships better consideration. This we feare, that longer then 
they finde the assurance of her Highnes gracious favor to the Kinge, they will 
noe longer esteeme him, but take everie occasion to leave him. Wherefore, 
with all dutie, we wishe, more for the generall good than any particular respects 
to his Lordship, that he might not be revoaked before the whole forces ; the 

' Revocation of the Erie, and of the forces conditional! contynue. [marginal note.J 
" Revocation of the Erie disapproved, [marginal note.] 
' Cap. entertayned by the Erie, [marginal note.] 



A. D. 1591.] 81 

due consideration wherof we leave to your Lordships approaved wisdomes, 
submittinge our selves and our opinions here unto. 

That which we alleage for the stay of my Lord, the same and much more 
may be saied for the untimely revocation of the whole forces, which God 
grawnte may not soe fall out. Your Lordships doe better conceave the incon- 
veniences that may growe thereby then we can reporte them, and her Ma- 
jesties providence can sufficiently foresee them. Wherefore leavinge all to 
your Lordships honorable directions and to her princely regarde, we humbly 
take our leaves. From Galley Fountayne, the 18th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordships most humblie to commande. 

To the right ho : our verie good Lordes, Hen. Uxtox. 

theLordes of her Majesties most honorable Tho. Leightox. 

Privie Counsell. Hex. Killegrewe. 



XLVI. 
1591, 
Sept. 18. " To the Lord Threasurer j by Painter." i 

My very good Lord. Your Lordships letter of the 13th of September I 
received the 17th, and doe acknowledge my due thanckfulnes for your Lord- 
ships so honorable and soe often remembraunce ; then the which nothinge is, 
or can be, more wellcome or comfortable to my poore selfe. I perceave by 
your letter that the laste of myne which your Lordship receaved, was of the 
7th. [from Deepe.' ] But my hope is your Lordship hath since receaved 
others of myne, whereof one by Mr. Smithe was in answeare of Her Majestys 
letters written to Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. Killegrewe, with whom I 
conferred at Deepe before our departure ; wherein I was boulde to deliver my 
poore opynion, submitting the same to yoiir Lordships grave censure. 

The letter written by your Lordship and others of the Lords of Her Ma- 
jesty's counsell, and directed to my Lord Generall, Sir Thomas Leighton and 
my selfe, dothe infynitely perplex his Lordship and make him growe des- 

' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office, with a few marginal notes by Lord 
Burghley. " These words are not In the original. 

M 



82 [September, 

peratCji rather wishinge death then lief. I am boulde to deliver the plaines 
of all things to your Lordship, and doe greatley feare this apprehension and 
discontentment will wourke straunge effectes in his Lordship, as it hath donne 
some already, which I cannot but pittye ; and if his Lordship doe returne be- 
fore his forces, I proteste I thinke mallancholly wiU kill him before his returne. 
Your Lordship, we only hope, will duely respect his Lordship and the cause, 
and continewe the honorable favorer and mainteyner and upholder of this so 
general! and publicke an action. 

Your Lordships expectation to heare from me of our sundrey actions and 
accidents I will not deceave ; and nowe we begine to enter into action, my 
letters shall increase with my matter. I wishe messengers male not faile us 
when I should write, or not miscarry with our letters by the way ; your Lord- 
ship otherwise shall want noe advertisments. If our Englishe messengers 
might be comanded by your Lordship to attende as they ought, they might 
doe good service, but they are unwillinge to come over to passe further then 
Deepe. 

Whereas your X/ordship is advertised that the Italian armye of the Popes is 
entered into the French countrie of Bourgondie, we heare have advice by letters 
of Bassan Pierre ^ an Alman CoUonell intercepted, written to the Duke of 
Parma, that the saied army was but in Lorraigne about Nancye and feared 
greately the encounter of the Kings armye of Reisters. This I receaved of 
the Marshall Byron. 

The armye of Reisters for the Kinge hath taken sixe Townes of the Duke 
of Lorraines for the Kinge, and spoiled his countrey ; so as he thirsteth after 
peace. The Kinge with the armye of Reisters was at Challons ^ in Cham- 
paigny the 14th. of this monethe, and writeth to the Marshall that with all 
diUigence he will come to the seege of Roan, which he male doe by the end of 
this moneth, if he doe not other wise busie him selfe by the waie in takinge 
Townes and Castells. 

My hope conceived of the possibillitie of the Kinges paiement for 2 
monethes,* (which your Lordship doubteth,) I hope will prove good; the 
rather since my conference with the Marshall and the reste of the Kinge 
counsell. The meanes I partlie knowe if the Kinge will graunte the same ; 
and rather then the forces be revoked, necessitie and honor will compell him. 

' The afflicted state of the erle. ^ Bassompierre. •&gt; The K. at Chalons, 14, 7ber. 

■* Hope of payement. 



A. D. 1591,] 83 

His disbursinge to the Reisters and others will, I knowe, be to greate for his 
estate, but the Enghshe and her Majesty's favor I hope he will, and I knowe 
he ought, respect first ; otherwise he will declyne more thereby then others 
are able or willinge to raise him ; I dare promise nothinge of the French, 
but will hope of them as a philosopher, not a divine. 

I humbly thanke your Lordship for the good newes conteyned in your letter 
which your Lordship vouchsafeth me of your goodnes, it encreasethe my debte 
the more to your Lordship, though it can add nothinge to my dutiful! afiiec- 
tion and desire to serve and honor your Lordship, wherunto I was sufficiently 
bounde before by your Lordships mauy favors. 

We are nowe goinge to Gournay i from this towne, which is but 4 leagues 
from hence, which the Marshall hath already invested this last night, and to 
morrowe we marche towardes him. It is a place that of necessitie muste be 
taken before the seege of Roan be attemted, being as it were the suburbes of 
Normandie and Picardie. They sale it cannot houlde out tenn dayes. 

So leavinge further to trouble Lordship I humbly take my leave. From 
Galley Fountaine, the 18th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship to command, 

Henry Unton. 



XLVIL 

1591, 

18 Sept. " From the Lord Chauncellor ; receaved the 23d of October, 
by Sir Roger WiUiams, at Noyon." ^ 

My verie good Lord. I have receaved your letter of the 13th of September, 
by your servante Joanas, with whome I have had longe conference of your 
healthe,^ and of £J1 other pEirticularities meete to be curiously enquired of soe 
deare a freinde ; in all which he hathe satisfyed me very well, and to my greate 
comforte I assure you. I must requite your Lordship with a shorte answeare 

' Gourney 4 leagues from Galley Fountayn. 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 157. 

^ Here begins the Cottonian copy. 



84 [September, 

at this tyme, beinge bussied with a speedy dispatch to the courte. My absence 
from the court this greate while by occasion of her Majestie's service in the 
cyttie hath been the cause of my seldome wrightinge to you ; but no wante of 
good will, my Lord, to performe anie office to doe you good, either in honer or 
in the execution of your greate charge, which I will advance by all the meanes 
I can, as your trewe freinde, and as occasion shall serve. My nexte beinge att 
the Courte wiU give me better oportunitye to advertise your Lordship bothe 
how things are accepted from you, and what courses are fitt for your further 
proceadinges, which your Lordship shall understand from me in all playnnes. 
Butt aU to your Lordship's comforte I doubt not, as of whom we can expecte 
nothinge but exceedinge well by the taste of that which we see aUreadye. 

I must likewise forbeare all advertisements to your Lordship untill my 
beinge their, this place yealdinge noe argumente of matter fitt for your know- 
ledge, but only the discovery of certeyne idle brayned humorall persons who 
will falle into strange actions, and uppon examination are founde to be 
men distempered in ther wittes and understandings and are dealte with all 
accordinlie; as namelie one Sellyand, who is carried with a stronge imagination 
that he shalbe Kinge after a shorte tyme ; and another called EUyott, who 
ofFereth to discover greate matters concerninge the estate, and cuminge to 
examination faUethe into a biasse moste strange, which I thincke is not fitt to 
write of, but punishable in the highest degree, in case he were a man of sounder 
discourse. I muste feede your Lordship for the presente with these tryfles. 
It may please you to accepte all in goode parte, and expecte amendes uppon 
better opportunity. I will not faile to doe all due complement with Sir 
Robert CecyU on your Lordship's behalfe ; and so thanckinge your Lordship 
for your honorable advertisements, with an earneste desire of your conty- 
nuance in health even as of my owne, I comende you to the hollye protection 
of the Almightie. 

From London, the 18th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship's most assured true friend, 

Chbi. Hatton, Cane. 
To my honorable good Lord, Sir Henry 
Unton, Knight, her Majestie's Ambassador 
resident in France. 



A. D. 1591.J 85 



XLVIII. 

1591, 

20 Sept. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 23d of October, 
by Sir Roger Williams, at Noyon." ^ 

My Lord Ambassador. I am sorry that I am drawen by commandement 
to write that which I wovdd not willinglie otherwise doe. Your allowance of 
my Lord GeneraUs journey to Mons"^ de Byron is heare by her Majestic 
greately disallowed ; that is, my Lord to goe nyne leagues to him that hath 
broken promise, and he to come but 3 leagues. Her Majestic findeth her selfe 
to be so evell recompensed by the French Kinge in delayinge to come to 
Roan when her men arryved, as she seameth unwillinge to have you to goe to 
him, or to be her ambassadour ; but God forbid that private respectes should 
overrule publicke. 

The oflFence that her Majestic taketh againste my Lord of Essex for his 
fruitlesse journey moveth her to mislicke you all there. I knowe no remedie 
but to have my Lord of Essex to retoume to make here satisfaction ; which I 
see will not be donne by him there. 

Until we heare from you howe the Kinge will assuredly paie the forces that 
may remaine, their wilbe no perfect resolution, but this at this tyme I finde 
determined, my Lord must come awaie ; and if some parte, as 2,000 or 2,500 
maie be ther payed, Sir Thomas Leighton shall have the commandement over 
them ; only we attend your answeare. 

FromOdyham, the 20th of September, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge firiende, 

To my verie lovinge friende. Sir W. Burghlie. 

Henery Unton, knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador in France. 

' The original is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 32 ; it is all in Burleigh's own hand. See 
Rymer's Feed. xvi. p. 121. 



86 [September, 



XLIX. 
1591, 
24 Sept. ' "From the Lord Threasurer; received at Aufiy, the 18th 

of November, by John Mussy ; and not sooner dehvered, 

by reason of my absence with the Kinge." 

My lord Ambassador, I have received your privatt letters, and other your 
common letters, jointly written by you with Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. 
Killegrew; bothe which letters are dated the 18th of this moneth, from Gaily 
Fountaine ; bothe which your letters came at one instant yesterdaie here to 
the Corte ; whereof her Majestic havinge understandinge, required the sight 
bothe of them, and of all other which came at this tyme, bothe from my Lord 
of Essex, and Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. KUlegrewe, also, which came 
from Deepe. And uppon readinge and perusinge all that came from thenc at 
this tyme, her Majestie was noe waie moved to change her former purpose for 
revocation of the Earle and her forces ; and therefore by her letters, her 
Majestie hath absolutely commanded the Earle to retoume, and likewise con- 
tineweth in mynde to have her forces retourne, as weU for the ofifence the 
French Kinge hath given her, as shee thincketh, in not performinge of his pro- 
mise of cominge personallie to the seege of Roan, when her forces did arryve, 
which were hastened to come thither by the Kinge, and promised to meete 
with them ; as also for that there is no assurance geven to her Majestie howe 
the forces should be paied after the ende of two monethes, which, by our compu- 
tation, is to the end the 26th of September, accomptinge foure weekes to a 
monethe, from the third of Auguste. And soe her Majestie hath, by her 
letters, signified to the Earle of Essex ; wherwith I am marvellous sorry to 
thinke how he wilbe afflicted, consideringe the noble desire he hathe to be in 
action of service. Butt yett doe I assure you, it shalbe fitteste for him to 
obey the Queenes Majesties commandementes and to restraine his owne 
desires ; and so I wishe bothe you and others to advise him thereto, and not 
to the contrary. 

And nowe some what concerninge your selfe. Her Majestie perceavinge 

' The title prefixed in the Bodleian MS. refers this letter to 14th September, but the date at the end 
is the 24th, and that, correctly. The original letter is contained in the Cotton MS. Calig. E. viii. See 
also Rymer's Feed. xvi. 123. 



A. D. 1591.] ^7 

your intention to goe to Loviers ; and also by likelyhoode, as she conceiveth, 
towards the French Kinge, she was so much oflFended therwith as shee gave 
commandement presently to have letters written for your revocation againe 
into England, mislikinge of you that you would goe towards the Kinge in 
any journey; consideringe, as she saieth, you could see howe dishonerablie 
he had used her. And thoughe I did my beste to staie that resolution, as 
I tooke it, verie inconvenient, for many reasons by me alleadged, yett stainge 
the same for your revocation, she commanded me to write unto you that you 
should either retoume from Loviers or go no fiirtherwards towards the 
French Kinge to doe him that honor, who had so apparentlie given her 
cause of offence. 

And therfore you are either to attende untiU the Kinge come into these 
partes than to make any voiage towardes him ; for in truth I finde her Majestie 
not to have fully broken her resolution for your caUinge backe into England, 
and yett I truste I shall have sufficient reasons to staie the same, if she should 
againe renewe it. 

And so beinge fully occupied at this tyme to answeare for her Majestie's 
affaires for divers places besides these of Normandie, I take my leave; as- 
suringe your Lordship on my faithe, I am as much troubled with this frowarde 
action, as I have ben with any theise manie yeares. And I muste blame 
the French Ambassador here, who since De Reaux departure with know- 
ledge of her Majesties mislikinge of my Lord of Essex goinge to the Kinge 
without her first knowledge, and of the not cominge of the Kinge nor his 
armye to beseege Roan, never came neare the Corte ; wher, by his presence 
and speaches, he might have sought either to defend or excuse his Masters 
delaies, and geven hope of some amendment by offer of discharginge of her 
Majesties paies at the end of two monethes; but to augment the former 
offence, he did within those two daies, not cominge himselfe, send a coppy of 
a letter from the Kinge dated at ' the 14th of this moneth, by their accompte, 
to him selfe ; requiringe that the Earle might come with his forces to Cham- 
paigne, a request very unseasonable, with out any offer to pay their charges. 

From Farneham, the 24th of September, 1591. 

Yours moste assuredly, 

When you write of journeys and removes William Burghley. 

from places to places, I, beinge desirous to 

' Blank, in the Bodleian Copy. 



88 [September, 



consider therof, doe viewe the beste parti-, 
cular cardes of Normandie and Picardie; 
but I cannot finde sundrey of the Townes 
or Castells named by you in your voyage; 
and therfore I pray you, bestowe, in a sheete 
of paper, the situation of such places as are 
not expressed in the cardes, and yett men- 
tioned in your letter. 

To the right honorable, my verie lovinge 
friende, Sir Henery Unton, Knight, her 
Majestie's Ambassador resident in France. 



1591, 

24 Sept. " A declaration of the causes movinge her Majestic to revoke 

her forces in Normandie, and under the charge of the 

Earle of Essex." i 

It is to be remembered what was the first cause and grounde of sendinge our 
forces nowe under the conducte of the Earle of Essex; wheruppon would 
foUowe consequentlie uppon such [ ^ unlooked for] accydentes, as have hap- 
pened on the French Kinge's parte towards us, what juste cause we have to 
complaine, bothe of the indignities offered us and our people sent theither, 
besides a speciall disgrace to our GeneraU; and by reason therof, also what 
necessarie cause we have to revooke bothe him and them from danger of further 
abusinge of them by their contynuance their. 

The firste motion made from the French Kinge to us, after our companies 
sent into Brittaigne, to our greate chardges, was to have the succor of 2 or 
3,000 men to joine with the Kinges forces, if the Duke of Parma shoulde 
newlye enter into France before the AUmaigne army could be ready ; [and] 

' The original draft of this paper, corrected by Lord Burghley, is in the State Paper Office ; a copy is 
contained in the Cotton. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 78. The corrections of the former are here indicated 
by being printed within brackets. ' " hard unlooked for," Cott. [Marginal note.] 



A. D. 1591.] 89 

when there was no hkelyhood [seen] of the Duke of Parmas retourne so 
timely [in] the yeare ; the Kinge then considering the same, and that the 
Almaigne armye coulde not be spedely levyed and brought into Fraunce, 
thought it necessary in the meane tyme to take the advantage of the tyme, and 
speedehe [afore all other things] to attempte the seege and recoverie of Roan 
and New Haven ; for the doinge wherof the Kinge determined to revooke his 
armye, which was disperced for a tyme, to releive a nomber of his nobillitie by 
licensinge them to departe to their bowses to refreshe them selves, with 
promise to retourne againe to the Kinge at such tyme he should comand 
them ; and with that armye to be made readie for the seege of Roan. 

It was required by the Kinge, sendinge therfore to us Monsr. De Reaux, 
that we should yeald to the Kinge that ayde of 3 or 4,000 men to come over 
with speed and to joyne with the Kings forces for the saied attempte, and to 
continewe the same in our wages there in France onlie for twomonethes ; and 
to this was added by the Kinge, that to cover this attempte from the know- 
ledge of the leagueres, and them of Roan, the Kinge resolved to departe 
him selfe with all his forces out of those partes of Normandie [into Pycardie], 
and to attende and hearken to the makinge ready of our forces, so as he did 
assure us that he would be readye with all his forces, for the matter of Roan, 
as soone as our men could arryve there. Where uppon the agreament beinge 
made by the King's Ambassador and our counsellors the 25th of June, by 
our accompte, [and de Reaux retoumed to the Kinge with the agreement,] 
suche speede was made in the leavyinge of the saied nombers as they were aU 
ready to be shipped by the xxth of July, beinge but the space of twentie sixe 
dales, and [with] the same also our generall at Deepe by the thirde of Au- 
guste, thoughe some of the companies arryved there foure or fyve dales 
sooner ; which reckoninge we thincke fitt to be well remembred, consider- 
inge the greate expedition used herein by our speciall direction for the desire 
we had to satisfy the Kinges purpose, [with all the speed we could possible,] 
in such an enterprise for his service against his forraigne enemies, as the like 
cannott be imagined through all Fraunce by sea or by land. 

Thus wee havinge seriously proceaded on our parte, it foUoweth to consider 
what is the cause we have of complainte, [as the cause bathe beene miscar- 
ried.] It was scene that when our army was ready landed, the Kinge was so 
farre of in the furthest parte of Pycardie, as neither our generaU, nor any of 
the King's ministers where our armye was, coulde tell where very well he 



90 [September, 

was ; sa\-inge that the same reported that [he] was beseeiginge of Noyon ; 
neither was their that coulde advertise our generall of any proper action of the 
French King, or of any armye likely to come into those partes^ for the Kinge 
was so farre of as no messenger could safely passe to him, but was distressed ; 
neither any kinde of order left in those partes, either with the governors of 
Deepe or any other, what our armye should doe. And so the generall not 
informed of any thinge he should doe, (beinge not a littele to his creditt and 
greately to our discontentment,) was after a fewe dales sente unto [from the 
Kinge after he had taken Noyon,] only by one of our owne servants. Sir 
Roger Williams, who had also served with a nomber of our men at the seege 
of Noyon, wher a greate number of them loste ther lives, and were hurte by 
assaultes. 

1 And by the waie, this male be remembred uppon occasion of speech of 
Sir Roger WiUiams, that only uppon knowledge had that the governor of 
Deepe was in greate doubte bothe of the towne and the countrey, we sente 
the saied Williams with 600 men [in Aprill laste] to his ayde ; charginge him 
[not to departe from] thence, and yett within a fewe dales after we heard that 
the Kinge had sente for him ; but for what purpose we coulde not heare untill 
by reporte it was comonly saied that he and our men were [at St. Dennys, and 
afterwards] afore Paris, and then a combate intended betweene certeine 
nombers of ours and as many hundreds of Spaniards, altogether without our 
likinge or knowledge. And the nexte newes also we could heare was, that our 
men were carryed awaye by the Kings order to Noyon, and ther put to as- 
saulte a greate strengthe, where manie loste their lives, and many were soe 
hurte, and all these [very harde] usages of our people donne with out our 
knowledge, wheras we sent them only to aide the governor of Deepe. And 
nowe this person of Sir Roger Williams, that had thus with out our licence 
[by the Kinges order] wasted our people, was chosen to come also to our 
generall to carrye him awaye from his charge without our knowledge. 

The message brought to the Earle by wourd of mouth was that the Kinge 
was desirous to speek with him to consider what was fitt to be donne [for his 
service and ours,] but to the contrary that he would go [further] into Cham- 
paigne, accompanied with 600 horsmen, to joyne with his Almaigne armye ; 
and for that the matter of Roan he woulde [forthewith] sende the Marshall 

» The passage here beginning, and ending with the word " knowledge," is added in the margin of the 
draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 91 

Byron with all his armye that he had before Noyon, and also that he woulde 
commande the Duke Monpensier to come to the service of Roan, with the 
forces of Normandie, beinge 1,000 horse and 4,000 footemen. And so the 
Earle, havinge made a dangerous journey to the Kinge, passinge by sundrey 
forces of the enemie, and havinge for his safetie carried with him his bands of 
horse men, which were harried by the longe journey, was like wise forced to 
retoume with as greate danger. And yett with the opinion that when he 
come from the Kinge, that the Marshall Biron came not forwarde with his 
armye and woulde foUowe him to be before Roan by the 15th of September, 
[and that the Duke of Monpensier should also joine his forces with the Mar- 
shall.] But yet contrary to all this [thus] promised to the Earle, the Marshall 
Byron [came not forward,] but carried all his power to an olde castell called 
Pierrefont [to laie] seege therto, [where he spent a good] tyme with out 
cominge onwards untUl he founde the strengthe of the castell such as he was 
in dispaire therof ; and so he lefte that seege, [as by his owne letters sent to 
the Earle appeareth,] and came onwarde to Gisors aboute the 8th of Septem- 
ber, and ther continewed untill that aboute the 18th he sente to the Earle to 
come backe from his campe [lyinge at Arques,] to meete him at a place nyne 
leagues of backwarde ; declaringe his purpose [first] to be to beseege Goumey 
[wherof noe speache had ben before that tyme], and to take it before he would 
come to Roan ; and for that cause he was desirous to have our forces to 
marche theither, wheras it would be uncertaine when that peece might be 
taken, or howe longe our forces should theire remaine with out doinge anie 
service at Roan. 

And hereby is maniefestley scene that there was noe regarde had of the ex- 
pence of aU the tyme past, from the landinge of our forces untill this sendinge 
for the Earle to speake with the Marshall, at which tyme ther was but 1 3 daies 
lefte for the service of our forces to end their two monethes, wherof some of 
them was to be spent in conference, and the rest verie fewe to doe any service 
against Gournay ; and surely none at all coulde be lefte to approach Roan, 
for which purpose onlie we sente them. 

To this strange meinner of proceadinge is to be added this also of Uke na- 
ture ; that where the Kinge promised the Earle that the Duke Monpensier 
should come to joyne with the Marshall in the seege of Roan, with 1,000 
horse and 4,000 footemen, that promise was so farre of to be performed, as 
the Duke of Monpensier to the contrary [wente] to the Kinge into Cham- 



92 [September, 

paigne with 4 or 500 horse ; and, as it may be gessed, rather gonne to the 
marriage of the Duchesse of BouiUion then to come to the seege of Roan, hav- 
inge noe purpose there unto, for their is not hearde of anie one horsemen or 
footemen cominge towardes Roan. And nowe in the ende, to encrease more 
indignities, the Kinge hathe of late written, [the fourthe of this monethe,J to 
his Ambassador [here, Monsr. de Beauvoir,] to move us earnestlye that the 
Earle might march with all our forces out of Normandie to the Kinge, beinge 
in Champaigne, or uppon the frontiers of Fraunce towards Lorraine, as 
thoughe the seege of Roan had never ben mente, or that no regard were had 
to anie former promisses and accords betweene the Kinge and us, [nor to the 
contynewance of our forces already the tyme lymitted], or that when we 
agreed to beare the charges of two monethes, havinge all things considered 
ben at the charge of twise or thrice two monethes, we muste by a bare 
messuage only done by the Kings Ambassador [and signified to us by send- 
inge to us a coppy of the Kings letters,] ingage our people so farre, as we 
should either never, or hardlie, recover them to retourne to their owne 
countreye ; a matter unreasonable [in our opinion] to be demanded, and 
[surely we knowe it] is absurde to be graunted. 

Now what is it for us to thincke to be thus abused by a Kinge of manie 
waies bounde to us, geivinge cause to the worlde to condeme us of lacke of 
judgment in yealdinge so greate succors as we have donne, wherby we are so 
manifestly [misused] and trifled with all as neither of us bothe can escape the 
sharpe censure of reproache, either for us to be noted unwise in sendinge our 
people with so greate a charge and without anie fruite thereof, or the Frenche 
Kinge to be taxed not onley with carelesnes of us and unkindnes [towards us, 
but rather with a she we of] contempt, and as it were with a purpose to moke 
us, for so our enemies wilbe liberall with their tounges [to make their advan- 
tage.] And therfore [as we ar very sorry that] we cannott remedie any 
parte of this that is paste, [so] yett we meane not to adventure the continu- 
ance of the like ; but havinge performed that which we promised, wherin we 
have not broken one jott, we are forced bothe to revocke our generall and 
our forces, and shall here after be more circumspect in trustinge to these 
kinde of promises, and therby avoide bothe the hazard of our people and pre- 
serve our reputation. 

[To the draft is appended a passage partly in Burleigh's hand, which not ap- 



A. D. 1591.} 93 

pearing in the Bodleian MS. would seem not to have been ultimately adopted. 
The same passage however occurs in the Cottonian copy. 

The endorsement is as follows, in Burghley's writing.] 

" 24 Sept. 1591. For Normandy." 

" 26 Sept. 1591. A declaration of the causes justly movynge Her Majestic 
to revok the Erie of Essex and his forces out of Normandy. Normandy." 



LI. 

1591. 

24 Sept. " From Sir Robert Cecyll ; receaved at Aufiy, the 

18th of November, by John Mussy." ' 

Sir, I thanck you for your letter ; and for as much as concernes your parti- 
cular, I will remember to [do] my beste. You may wonder to receave reprehen- 
tion for goinge to Loviers towards the Kinge, for writinge to the good of this 
action, and for goinge to his minister, you beinge her Majesties Ambassador, 
and not yett presented ; '^ I do so to, but what shall I saye ? I see the longer 
we live, the more we may leame ; but truly for that I cann give noe reason, 
nor yett dare I give you advise, for I should, I proteste, in all things have 
donne the same as you have donne. 

The Queene was so highlie offended that you would stirre to meete the 
Kinge nowe in the heate of this rebuffe, which her Majestic hath receaved of 
him, in her conceipte, as in all hastie dispatche you should have ben sente for 
to have come backe ; which my Lord affirminge that he that was there was 
to good, excepte his actions were more agreeable with his promises, it is 
staled, ahd many reasons delivered for it, but because it was privatt, I doe de- 
sire you to conceale it ; and yett you maie judge therby that the tyme agreeth 
not with your desire for Grimstons revocation ; when things are calmed 
better my indevors shall never be spared. And if you sawe or heard howe 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 118. 
- Here begins the Cottonian copy. 



94 [September, 

trewly my Lord setteth forthe your creditt and judgment, you would knowe 
it as I doe ; of which be you ever assured. 

This httell experience hath taught me that the best of them all is not to be 
condemned for not doinge for their freinds what they desire ; for they are not 
able to doe what they would doe, even in the greatest actions that toucheth 
nearest, as by this appearethe. 

You wiU receive reprehensions, and Mr. Leighton with you, which sheweth 
my wante of judgment ; for I thought your writtinges would never have 
deserved greater wellcome. God sende you healthe and honor, as to him who 
hathe and shall have power to commande me as your moste lovinge and true 
freinde. 

The 24th of 7bre. From Farnham. 



R. Cecyll. 



To the right honorable, my very lovinge 
freind, Sir Henry Unton, Knight, her Ma- 
jesties Ambassador with the French Kinge. 



LII. 

1591, 

25 Sept. " From her Majestic to my selfe and Sir Thomas Leighton. 
Receaved from Sir Thomas, at the Campe before Roan, 
the 1 of November ; and not sooner delivered me, 

by reason of my absence with the Kinge." ^ 

Trustie and well beloved, we greete you well. Althoughe, uppon the hear- 
inge of your letters lately sente heither we perceive that you gave advice and 
consente to the Earle of Essex, uppon the Marshall Byrons requeste, to goe 
to meete him on the waie, to consulte aboute the seege of Goumay, and that 
you, the Ambassador, and Leighton did accompanie him thither, for which 
your attempte therin, and for your further advice geven to carrie our forces 
theither to Goumay, and the hastie sendinge them theither, we comanded our 

1 Blank in the Bodleian transcript. 

' The original draft, all in Lord Burghley's hand, is preserved in the State Paper Office. The original 
letter may be seen in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 235. See also Rymer's Feed. xvi. 122. 



A. D. 1591.] 95 

Threasurer to declare to you howe we misliked those your inconsiderate ac- 
tions, dirrectlie contrary to our former letters written to you, by which we 
signified oiu: myndef to have the Earle and our forces to retoume, and not to 
continewe longer then to the ende of the two monethes ; yett the more we 
thincke of these your errors in counseUinge of the Earle, or assentinge to him, 
contrary to our direction, the greater we finde your faulte to be, and finde it 
necessarie that you should so understande the same to be by your owne 
letters ; lettinge you to understand that we conceived better bothe of your 
discreations and dutiefullness, when we sente you theither, then thus, after 
knowledge given you of our determination for their retoume, as sone as ship- 
pinge might come for them after the ende of the two monethes, to geive coun- 
sel! to remove them fiirther into Fraunce many dales marches from the sea 
side ; and that, to the seege of a towne of strengthe never mentioned to us 
before, and uncerteine howe longe the seege might continewe, and altogether 
uMcertaine howe our people should be paied after the ende of the two 
monethes, which was to expire with in eight or nyne daies after your con- 
sent. Such a counsell, notwithstandinge anie discourses made to you by the 
Marshall of the necessitie of the beseeginge that place, cannott be defended, 
at the leaste not to be executed without first havinge our allowance. And 
therfore lett this be a waminge to you herafter, by noe perswations of a 
stranger to assent unto any thinge on our parte that shall appeare contrary to 
our determination, with out our privietie and allowance. 

And as to you, our Ambassador's, goinge to Loviers, we finde it strange, 
not knowinge for what cause you should goe any waie forwarde to followe the 
French Kinge, from whom we have receaved such cause of discontentement, 
as your self dothe well knowe, excepte the world should see that by your 
followinge of him to remote partes we should in a sorte grace him for his dis- 
gracinge of us, and our generall and people ; consideringe when we sent 
you theither, our meaninge was that you should have founde him there neare 
Roan, accordinge to his promise. And therefore we will you rather to re- 
toume backe to some place free from infection, wheire you male remaine with 
out danger to your healthe ; and when he shall come towards Roan, wherof 
we see no certentie, then it shalbe sufficient enough for you to goe to him ; if 
otherwise we shall not finde it more convenient to revooke you. 

And to the intente none of you may alleadge ignorance of the juste causes 
of our discontentment, but male, as cause shalbe given to anie of you uppon 



96 [September, 

speeche with any of the French Kinges counsell that shall seeme to mislike 
of the revocation of our forces, be informed to answear therin ; we have com- 
manded a memoriall ' to be made in writinge conteyninge some speciall 
pointes, which we have bothe sente to the Earle of Essex for his instruction, 
and have comanded the like to be sent to you ; which writinge conteyneth 
nothinge but truthe, and that which cannott be denyed by the Kinge nor anie 
his ministers.^ 

Gyven under our signett, at Sutton, neare Guilforde, the 25th ^ of Septem- 
ber, 1591, in the xxxiijth yeare of our raigne. 

To our right trustie and welbeloved, Sir 
Henry Unton, Knighte, our Ambassador re- 
sident with the French Kinge, and to our 
trustie and welbeloved, Sir Thomas Leighton, 
Knight, Capten of our Isle of Garnesey. 



LIII. 

1591, 

27 Sept. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Mr. Robert Carye." * 

Accordinge to my laste letters from ^ Galley Fountaine, by Painter, the 
messenger, « we did sitt downe before Goumay, which would not yeald, but 
defended itselfe in hope of rehefe, until our cannon plaied, and two fayre 
breaches were made ; and when the EngKshe were ready to goe to the assaulte 
they yealded the towne into our hands, with verie harde conditions for them 

' This alludes to the " Declaration of the causes," already printed. 

2 The draft in the State Paper Office here ends. 

' The Bodl. MS. and the copy in Rymer's Foedera ascribe this document to the 26 of September ; 
but the original in the Cottonian MS. bears date the 25th of that month. 

■&gt; The original of this letter, with Burghley's marginal annotations, is in the State Paper Office ; the 
draft, all in Union's handwriting, is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 440. 

* Here begins the Cottonian draft. 

* 18 September [marginal note.] 



A. D. 1591.] 97 

selfes, the 26 th of this inonethe. 1 The composition was that the Governor, 
Captens, leaders, oflScers and gentlemen of qualitie, should become prisoners, 
not de guerre, for wante of which wourds they are at the Kings mercy ; the 
souldiers to departe with white stickes onley in their hands, and the Burgesses 
be used as others the Kings subjectes. My Lord Generall and I did not 
forgett to inserte in the composition the delivery of any of her Majesty's 
subjectes ; which was graunted, and onley one Ireshman^ was delivered, who 
had rune away from Sir Edward Norrys, and served in the towne as a 
souldier. 

By takinge of this towne, divers places and fortes doe render them selves 
to the Kinge, as one yesterdaie especially uppon summones, called Gerbroy,^ 
with in two leagus of this place ; which did verie greately anoy the Kinge ; 
and many more wiU doe the like ; soe that we shall cleare these partes unto 
the gate of Roan, and our campe when yt shall come before Roan wilbe 
greately benefitted therby ; as in my former letters I have made knowen to 
your Lordship. 

Our campe riseth to morrows, and we march towardes Roan, hopinge as 
soone as we present our selves before Caudebeck * it will yeald ; which 
dependes much uppon this towne ; of noe greate strength, but of greate conse- 
quence for us. 

The Marshall dothe hasten all he maye to the seege of Roan, and intendeth 
not to delaye that enterprise, or to employe her Majestys forces ells where. 
His only staie hath ben for the takinge in of Gournay and Caudebecke, and 
for the Kings cominge. 

Of the Kings retourne I cannot advertise your Lordship anie certainty, for 
after he had joyned with the Reisters, hearinge the ItaUean army was not 
distante from him above twentie leagues, he resolved with some horse to foUowe 
them, and departed from Atteny in Champaigny, on Munday the 19th of this 
moneth ; * intendinge within 7 or 8 dales to retourne backe, since which tyme 
I have no advertisement from him ; but expecte to morrowe the comminge of 
Monsr. Guitrey,^ who wiU geive us certaine knowledge of the Kinge. 

In his letters to the Marshall he promiseth a speedy retourne, who dothe so 

' 26 September, composition, [marginal note.] ° An Irish soldiour. [marginal note.] 

3 Gerbray rendered, [marginal note.] * 28 Sept. Caudebeck. [marginal note.] 

' Atteny in Champayn. The K. went towards the Italyons 19 September, [marginal note.] 
« Monsr. Grytry expected, [marginal note.] 

O 



98 [September, 

soUicitt him, with the reste of his counsell; but this desier to finde such an 
enemye maie prolonge more his retourne then is expected, albeit nott verie 
longe. 

The Kings absence hath greatly hindered the assurance of paie for her 
Majestys forces, i which we should procure accordinge to her Majesty's 
pleasure ; yett have we so urged the matter unto the Marshall and the Kinges 
counsell here that Monsr. Do, who is superintendant of all the Kinges fy- 
naunces, is appointed expressly to repaire within 4 dales to our campe, ^ to 
geive us some matter of satisfaction therin, and we are perswaded this assurance 
wilbe sufficient; whereof they assure us we shall not faile; soe that by nexte 
letters, I hope to assure your Lordship of the weekely paie of her Majestys 
souldiers. If it were not for Monsr. Do his comminge, and the procuringe 
assurance of his paie, I woulde goe hence from this place to Loviers, but nowe 
I must followe the campe untile I have discharged my duty in that behalfe. 

The Duke of Mayne attendeth in the frontiers the Duke of Parma his 
cominge and his other forces, and geveth us leave to be masters of the feild, 
and none of his doe offer so much as to releive any towne ; so that his only 
hope is, and must be, of his auxillarie forces. 

We daiely expecte her Majesty's pleasure and your Lordships answeare of 
our letters for the staye of my lord GeneraU, who in this seege of Gournay 
hath carried him selfe with extraordinary painefallnes, watchinges, and such 
true valeore and discreation as did incorage his souldiers greately, and gayne 
him greate reputation with the Marshall, and the reste of the French, wherfore 
he can here hardly be spared. 

This gentleman, Mr. Gary, was very forwarde to goe to the assaulte, and 
with verie greate resolutione readie to march towards the breach. He is a 
gentleman of verie greate hope and forwardnes. 

When I may offer your Lordship greater matters, and wourthie your adver- 
tisment, I will not faile ; which cannot be before the Kings cominge. In the 
meane season I crave to be excused both by your Lordship and pardoned by 
her Majesty. And so I humble take my leave. 

From Gournay, the 27th of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship to comande, 

Henry Unton. 

' The lack of assurance of paye by the K. absence [marginal note.] 

^ Mens', to come within 4 dayes, that is, by the 2d of October. Assurance of paye. [marginal note.] 



A. D. 1591.] 99 



LIV. 
1591, 
27 Sept, « To the Lord Chancellor; by Robert Carey." ' 

My verie good Lord. Since my departure from Deepe I have followed the 
armye, wherby I have encreased my healthe much better, and avoyded 
idlenes, wherwith the towne of Deepe did infecte mee. We incamped before 
this towne of Goumay the 19th of this moneth, wherin were 150 souldiers, 
besides vere many burgesses, who for 5 or 6 dales defended themselves verie 
resolutly in hope of releife from the Leaguers ; but when the cannon plaied 
and two faire breaches were made, they most basely yealded to what we 
required, as maye appeare by the duphcatt of my Lord Threasur's letter, 
which I sende your Lordship here inclosed. 

This towne is eight leagues distant from Roan in the countrey of Caux in 
the middest of divers townes, which holde for the Kinge ; it is the suberbes of 
Picardie and Normandie, of greate importance to us for the seege of Roan, 
bothe for the safe passage of our victuells thither, without the which we mighte 
have bene famished, as also to take away the only place of retreate from the 
enemy, who when he should attempte anie thinge uppon us (beinge beaten) 
would retyer hither, and place a garrison of 1500 horse and foote to annoy us, 
and keepe us watchinge ; so that of necessitie we were forced to beseege it, 
only for the enterprise of Roan. It is of good strength, rytche and in a verie 
fertyle countrey. It will be to the King very profytable, for a great part of a 
contry is gayned by it, and many fortes and castles begune to render them 
selves, which did depende uppon this towne. 

The two breaches were geiven to the French and Englishe, but the cheife 
to the French; and bothe with greate resolution marched to the assaulte, 
whereby was shewed greate emulation on bothe sides, the two nations strivinge 
who should enter first, which contention the composition did take away. 

Of the Kings retoume, or of his actions, I cannot advertise your Lordship 
otherwise then as conteyned in the duplicatt of my Lord Treasurers letter ; 
which, to spare your Lordship trouble, I will not repeate. 

' The original draft of this letter, all in Unton's writing, is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. 
E. viii. fol. -136. 



100 [September, 

At the Kinges retourne I have to present your Lordship with matter of more 
wourthe, and after I have had audience and acquainted my selfe with his 
humours and resolution, I hope to give some better testimonie of my ser- 
vicable minde. I would have written to your Lordship, when as I, Sir Thomas 
Leighton, and Mr. Killegrewe, did write to the Lords of the Counsell, our 
answer, from whome we receaved verie sharpe letters for the revocation of my 
Lord Generall, and some parte of the Englishe forces. My hope is your 
Lordship hathe perused the one and the other ; but we had so shorte tyme to 
answeare that letter, beinge in our journey, and I had so lately written to your 
Lordship from Deepe, as I was loathe without matter to importune your 
lordship with my letters, and I wanted leisure if I woulde. If in that letter 
to their Lordships we have erred, or if her Majesty misconster our meaninge, 
I crave your Lordship's honorable advertisement, favorable defence and repre- 
hension ; as in all other my errors whatsoever. 

My Lord Threasurer dothe write often verie honorablie unto me, and with 
freindley advise, when your Lordship is absente, and parte of his letter with 
his owne hande ; I crave humblie your Lordship's thanckes to him, that he may 
perceive my acknowledgment and your goodnes. 

I purpose nowe to foUowe the campe, and assure your Lordship my badd 
diet, ill lodginge and toile heare, doe me greate good ; for some tymes we have 
meate, sometymes little or nothinge, and none but what we take from the 
enemy by force. 

The French manner of incampinge dothe discontente me moste, for we 
loadge farr asunder and feare more a sudden cuttinge of our throates or 
surprise in a night then the trewe valloure of the enemie, which happenethe 
often. 

For wante of greatter matters I presume to entertaine your Lordship with 
these trifles, for the which I crave pardon, and remembringe this my error I 
humblie take my leave ; beseechinge God to give your Lordship healthe, true 
contentement, and all increase of grace and honor. ' 

From Gournay, the 27lh of September, 1591. 

Your Lordship's humblie to commande, 
Henry Unton. 

' Here ends the draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 101 



LV. 

1591, 

1 Oct. " To the Lord Chancellor, the first of October, 1591." i 

May it please your Lordship. I am nowe in respecte of the good company 
of Monsr. Guytry, forced ^ suddenly to departe with him towardes the Kinge, 
as very glad of this occasion offered ; the rather, because her Majesty hath 
heretofore so injoyned me, and I might herafter faile of soe good oppor- 
tunitie. Albeit my health and strength be not througlie recovered, yett to 
obey her Majestie I will hazard leif and whatsoever. 

The King is by this tyme at Cedan in Champaine, retourned from his 
pursuit of the Italiane armye, which is from here verie neare 100 EngUshe 
miles. My hope is either to meete him by the waie, or to goe throughe and 
finde him there, where it is thought a marriage shalbe solempnised betweene 
the Viscounte of Turenne, and Madame de Bouilhon, the heyre of the Duke 
ofBouillion, which will much encrease his greatnes. 

Such newes as this campe yeeldeth your Lordship maie receave in the in- 
closed coppy of my Lord Threasurer's letter. 

My shorte warninge and this gentlemans haste force me to end your Lord- 
ship's trouble ; but in my nexte I hope to advertise your Lordship of myne 
owne knowledge of matters more at large. And so in hast, with all duty, I 
humbly take my leave. 

From the campe by Fromery, within 4 leagues of Gournay, the 1st of Octo- 
ber, 1591. 

Your Lordship's humbly to commande, 
Henry Unton. 

' The original draft, all in Union's writing, is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 442, 
in which volume at fol. 206, is also a copy of the same letter. 
' Here begins the original draft. 



102 [OCTOBEE, 



LVI. 

1591, 

1 Oct. " To the Lord Threasurer." • 

My verie good Lord. I have longe expected some good ^ opportunity to 
goe to the Kinge, accordinge to her Majesty's pleasure signified heretofore by 
your Lordship ; and for wante of health or safe passage, I have to my greife ben 
forced to stay ; but nowe beinge somewhat recovered, and growinge partely 
stronge, and Monsr. Guytry beinge readie to retoume to the Kinge, I thought 
it necessarie to accompany him together, where I may make some amends for 
my former slacknes, and doe her Majesty that service that bothe my place 
and duty requires. Wherfore, though my departure be very sudden uppon 
a shorte warninge, yett I could not forbeare to advertise your Lordship hereof, 
that I might receaive her Majesty's pleasure from tyme to tyme and your 
Lordship's commandements accordingley ; intendinge not to departe from the 
Kinge so longe as my health will suflFer mee. 

The newes that Monsr. Guytry bringes from the Kinge are that the Italian 
armye, and 3,000 Neapolitans and Spaniards of a late levie, are joyned with 
the Duke of Lorraynes forces and the Duke de Maynes ; so that the Kinge 
was forced to retoume, and, as he thincketh, is by this tyme at Sedon in 
Champaigne. 

The Itahan army consisteth of 3,000 Swisses and 1,200 horse, as he saieth, 
and the 3,000 Neapolitanes and Spaniards, wherof the Kinge never heard 
before, doe encrease the Popes army greately, insomuch as it will allmost 
consiste of 10,000. 

Monsr. Do is daihe expected, and, as the Marshall Byron and Forgett the 
Secretarie doe constantely affirme, will take order for the paye of her Majesty's 
forces ; which if he doe not, I shall the lesse beleive them herafter : yett dare 
I not assure any thinge from them, but hope well in the interim. The campe 
riseth to morrow from this place, and marcheth towardes Caudebecke ; wherof 
your Lordship shall have better advertisement after my ^ departure, 

' The original draft, in Union's writing, is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 446; 
and a copy also at fol. 206 of the same volume. 
^ Here begins the Cottonian draft. 
3 Here begins the copy at fol. 206 of the Cott. MS. 



A. D. 1591.J 103 

I feare when all the Duke of Parma's forces shall joyne, he wilbe much to 
stronge for the Kinge ; yett is the Kinge able to bringe into the field 4,000 
French horse, 4,500 Reyters, and 14,000 foote stronge, with his auxiliaries. 
The German army consisteth but of 4,500 horse, and 6,000 foote — this 
Monsr. Guytree, uppon his owne veiwe dothe assure me, — who, when they 
wante paie, will breake imediatly. 

Certaine advertisemente is brought hither of the death of Monsr. Chastil- 
lion, who died of a continewall burninge feavor ; whose deathe is very greately 
lamented here by men of all sortes, as well Papists as Protestants. It is also 
verie constantely here reported that the Viscounte of Turenne shaU shortely 
marry Madame de Bouillion. 

Other advertisements I can learne none here wourthy your Lordship's 
knowledge; but when I shall attend the Kinge, I doubte not to be better 
informed, and to advertise matter of more waight and better certenty ; for I 
feare they conceale here the worste from us, and paie us with the beste, which 
there I shall better discerne. 

Monsr. Guytrey is ready to departe, and I, for wante of leisure and matter, 
am forced to conclude ; wherfore, I humblie take my leave. 

From the campe at a village by Fromery, within 4 leagues of Gournay, the 
1st of October, 1591. 

Your Lordship to command. 



Henry Unton. 



' Upon nowe advertisement is come from 
the Kinge to the Marshall that Monsr. De- 
diguiers and Alfonso Corso surprised the Duke 
of Savoye as he was beseeginge a towne of the 
Kings in these parts; and by reason of the 
negligent gard that he kepte, have defeated his 
whole troupes, and him selfe is either slayne 
or taken prisoner. 



This postscript is not found in the Cott. MS. nor in the draft. 



104 [October, 



LVII. 

1591, 

4th Oct. " From the Lord Chancellor; receaved the 18th of 
November at Auffy, by John Mussy." i 

My verie good Lord. I receaved by this noble gentleman, Mr. Robert 
Carey, your letter of the 27th of the laste, from Gournay, and I very hartely 
thank ^ you for the advertisement which was good and exceedinge well come 
unto me bothe in it selfe, and the rather in that it came from your Lordship. 
Since my late cominge to the Corte, wher I maide stale but some fewe daies, 
I finde that her Majestic hath taken some hard conceipte, as well towards 
your Lordship as the Generall, for your goinge to the Marshall Byron ; of 
you particularly, as secondinge his Lordship's error, wherof this offence is 
growen ; her Highnes takinge it for an indignitie that her Generall or Am- 
bassador should attende or foUowe any person whatsoever, other then the 
Kinge himselfe, to whom you are sente, or that her forces should be em- 
ployed in any other sorte, then accordinge to the forme of the contract ; and 
saieth it had ben farre more fit for the Marshall to have attended uppon either 
of you, then you uppon him. 

Here uppon her expresse pleasure is I should advize your Lordship firom 
hence forthe to consider well uppon the pointes of your comission, and in no 
wise to exceed the lymittes therof. Howebeit the newes of the wynninge of 
Gournay, hathe somewhat qualified this displeasure, insomuch as her Highnes 
hathe grawnted to the Lord Generall one monethes further stale; wherof your 
Lordship shall receive more particular advertisement by letters from my Lord. 
Her Majestie dothe resemble this goinge of the Lord Generall, and vour 
Lordship and of Sir Thomas Leighton's to the, Swenckes Daunce, three on a 
rewe forward and bacwarde, as a journey taken to verie smale purpose. It 
shalbe therfore very fitt in this case your Lordship use some good and apte 
ceremonie, bothe on the Kinges behaFe, and your owne, such as in your 
judgment male be^nost6 plausible, and maiebeste contente her Highnes fancie ; 
otherwise some unpleasinge conceiptes male growe, which afterwards may 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. -viii. fol. 239. 
' Here begins the Cottonian copy. 



A. D. 1591.] 



105 



hardely be removed. My indevor shall not faile, either therin, or in any 
thinge ells, to doe all good offices bothe to uphold and encrease her Majesties 
gratious opinion, I assure you. And I nothinge doubte of your Lordship's 
wise consideration uppon these points, and that such amendes shjJbe made 
by your discreete managinge of this matter, as shalbe a full satisfaction, and 
breede eflFectes in her Highnes of exceedinge good likinge towarde you; 
wherwith, my verie good Lord, I bidd you moste hartely fsireweU. 
From London, the fourthe of October^ 1591. 

Your Lordship's verie assured 

true freinde. 



This mominge, cominge from Otelands, I 
mett with my Lady Unton, goinge towards 
your Lordships howse in the countrey. In 
truthe I founde by her countenance that 
her late sicknes had drawne her exceedinge 
lowe ; but on your Lordships behalfe and 
hers I was exceedinge glad to see her 
amendement. 



To my verie honorable good Lord, Sir 
Henry Unton, Knighte, Lord Ambassador 
for her Majestic in Fraunce. 



Chr. Hatt. Cane. 



1591, 
15 Oct. 



LVin. 

" To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Lekey." ^ 



My verie good Lord. I hope your Lordship hath receaved my last letters 
of the 8th of this monethe written from Champaigne ^ wherwith I expreshe 

' The original draft is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 206, b. ; the original letter itself, with 
marginal notes, (but of no importance,) is preserved in the State Paper Office. 
' That is, Compeigne. 

P 



106 [October, 

sente a Frenchman to keepe and recommended the sendinge of the pacquett 
to 1 Ottwell Smythe. 

Your Lordship maie greatelie favor me to lett me understand of the receipte 
of my letters in this journey, and I hold it necessarie herafter to send a coppy 
of the former letters by the nexte that followe ; so shall your Lordship, if not 
at the firste, yett at the laste receave my advertisements ; which course I will 
continewe untill your dislike therof. 

This journey of myne hathe ben full of danger and expence, for there never 
passed daye wherin ambuscades were not laide for us, and the enemy daiely 
in our viewe, some tymes skirmishinge with us, and we forced, to my greate 
charge, to have foote convoyes for wante of horse in the garrisons. 

My selfe and my servants were contynewally forced to ryde armed ; and in 
my company besides were not above twentie horse. Att the latter ende of 
our journey the enemy assembled sixe garrysons together of horse and foote. 
Havinge seacret intelligence from the Kinge, beinge within eight leagues of 
him, we were forced, [being] required so by him, to retourne backe to this 
towne, where he resolveth to be within these three or four dales to give me 
audience. 

The Kings comminge to this towne is for the love he beareth to the 
Governor's daughter, who hathe verie greate power over him ; and he 
maketh me the coulor of his cominge hither.^ 

The Kinge is nowe before Virvyn, neare St. Quyntines, which he battereth ; 
and uppon veiwe of the cannon is thought will render to him ; for it is not 
stronge, ill manned, and cannot holde out. He escaped hardely the shott of 
the cannon, which grazed under his horses belley. 

The Kinge hasteneth nowe to the seege of Roan, where he resolveth to be 
with aU speed possible with all his army.* 

Some secrett enterprise is intended for the surprissinge of Roan, which a 
gentleman of good accompte hath within these two dales discovered to the 
Kinge. The Kinge and his best captaines doe beleive assuredly that Roan 
cannot holde out the seege longer then a moneth, albeit the towne be well 
victualed and manned, if the Duke of Parmas forces doe not come to their 
succor ; which I leave to your Lordship's consideration. 

' Here begins the draft in the Cottonian MS. 

2 In cypher in the original, but decyphered in the margin. 

^ In cypher in the original, but decyphered in the margin. 



A. D. 1591.J 107 

Monsr. De Nevers hath levyed 1,000 Swisses at his owne charge to serve 
the Kinge in his government of Champaigne ; which force, as is saied, is 
joyned with him. He hath also two companies of the King's Reyters lefte 
with him for his better strengthe, to make head to the [Duke of] Parma if he 
attempte anie thinge in Picardie or Champaigne, which is feared, if he 
come into Fraunce; and Monsr. De Longeville shalbe lefte behinde the 
Kinge with other forces to joyne with Monsr. De Nevers. 

The Kinge is much discontent with the manner of his Reyters marchinge, 
who, if they march two dales, will rest three ; which hath hindered his ser- 
vice and the enterprise of Roan. 

The infextion amonge the Kings Lansquenetts, as the reporte here goeth, 
is greate ; which discontenteth him much, fearinge leaste it may infecte his 
whole armye. 

It is advertised the Kinge that the Duke of Savoyes armye had lately a 
greate overthrowe aboute Chambrey, by Monsr. de Diguiers, to the number 
of 2,500 slaine, and 4 monethes paie taken about them. 

The former newes of the Duke of Savoyes defeate was untrewe, yett writ- 
ten by the Kinge to the Marshall. 

Monsr. Sanbole Governor of Metz intercepted letters written out of Itallye 
to the leaguers that the Pope was at the pointe of deathe ; and afterwardes 
takinge a Italian and some curriors of ItaUie, was assured by them of his 
deathe ; which was the rather believed, because Sfiirondrado his nephewe is 
returninge into ItaUye, with his forces, and some parte of them already de- 
parted towards ItaUie. This newes comfortethe the Kinge and all his greate- 
lye, and discourageth the enemye. Their retourne, if it be trewe, is the beste 
assurance of his death. 

The Kinge is also advertised that the Duke of Parma will not come this 
yeare into Fraunce ; and in respecte of the deathe of the Pope, dothe holde 
yt to be more probable, which the Jesuites of the Lowe Countreies and here doe 
greately feare, preachinge against him for his slacknes. 

I have receaved advertisement from some of good credit that the Duke of 
Guise and Duke of Mayne doe seeke to supplante one another ; which mani- 
festlye appeareth by a letter secretlie written by the Duke of Mayne to the 
cheife of the towne of Troye in Champaigne, wherin he reprehended them 
greatelye for their entertainment which they so kindelye gave to the Duke of 
Guise, and their presentinge him soe bountifiiUy ; alleadginge to them that 



108 [October, 

within 3 monethes he would become their greatest enemye. Wherof the 
Duke of Guise beinge advertised, and much oflFended therwith, made answeare 
to some of friendes, that he would prosecute duringe lief the revendge of his 
fathers death, wherof he saied he coulde not in his owne conscience accuse 
the Kinge ; and that is should appeare to the worlde for the defence of his 
countrey, and of the holy union, he would be the first to geive battaile to the 
Kinge ; " wherin if the Duke De Mayne did rune away," (as saied he had 
done heretofore,) "my selfe then will execute him with myne owne handes, as 
a due punishment for his cowardlynes." 

The Duke of Mayne is much discontented with the Kinge of Spaine for 
abatinge his former allowance from fiftie thousand crownes the moneth to 
tenn thousand ; and is more discontented that he maketh the same propor- 
tion of allowance to the Duke of Guise, makinge no diflference betweene them, 
and not regardinge his deserte and former good service. 

The common people beginne to showe greater aifection to the Duke of Guise 
then to the Duke of Mayne, and the leaguers give it out openlye that he shall 
marrie the Kinge of Spaines daughter and be elected their Kinge ; ' he is 
greately followed by gentlemen of the league, and hath already 800 horse and 
1,000 foote ; all which much ofFendeth the other, who hopes to be Regent of 
France, and this doth add oyle to the fyer. 

Espeme, a towne holdinge for the Kinge in Champaigne, wilbe shortely 
beseiged by the Duke of Mayne, a towne of noe greate strengthe, yett of 
greate importance to the Kinge, beinge uppon the ryver of Marne ; which 
if the enemye take, he cleareth all that ryver to ChaUons, And this towne 
dothe nowe verie much annoy the enemie, and profitt the Kinge many 
waies. 

Nowe leavinge all other serious newes, I will acquainte your Lordship 
with the marriage of Monsr. Turrenne with Madame de Bouillion, which 
wilbe verie shortely consumated ; for they were lately betrothed. This 
hathe bine some cause of the Kings stale, and brought to passe with many 
dificulties. And the Kinge is pleased to paie all the Duke of Bouillions 
debtes, which amounted to 200,000 crownes. It will encrease Monsr. de 
Turennes greatnes, and assure the Kinge the better of those partes. 

1 " The practise of a marryadge with Spaine and then to be elected King." Marginal note in the 
State Paper Office copy. 



A. D. 1591.J 109 

Thus leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, hopinge verie shortely to 
advertise her Majestic and your Lordship of the King's marshall courte, 
which I have longe expected to see, I humbly take my leave. 

From Noyon, the 13th of October, 1591. 

Your Lordship to command, 

Hexry Unton. 



LIX. 
1591, 
15 Oct. " To the Lord Chancellor ; by John le Roy." i 

My verie good Lord. By my laste letters of the 8th from Compeigne your 
Lordship understandeth the whole course and accydentes of my journey 
theither ; and such occurrences by the waie I gathered, I then also imparted 
to your Lordship, which I did but reporte without beleivinge them, and not 
otherwise recommendinge them to be beleived then with discreation, neither 
dare I much urge beleife in theise French causes, which are as uncertaine as 
themselves. 

Since my departure from Compeigne, I passed by this towne. From hence 
to Chawney, and so within eight leagues of the Kinge ; whether intendinge to 
take my journey in the night the 13th of this moneth, as we were ready to 
departe, we receaved intelligence from his Majestic of divers ambuscadoes 
laied for us, to the number of 300 horse and 400 foote, and therefore com- 
manded by him to retourne with all speede to this towne; whether he 
resolveth within 3 or 4 dales to give us audience. 

Betweene this towne and Chawney, 80 horse lay in ambuscado for us, and 
att length followed us in veiwe, yett did not dare to offer to charge us ; we 
havinge but 60 horse, wherof 40 were myne owen, verie well armed and as 
well mounted. 

This journey hath throughly recovered me, albeit my weake body forced 
me to weare armor and to ride bothe nighte and daye ; for the Kinge's townes 
and the enemyes are so intermingled in every place as it is impossible to travill 

' A copy of this letter is preserved in the Cotton, MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 200. 



110 [October, 

safiely ; but herafter I resolve continewally to followe the Kinge ; so shall I 
serve her Majestie best, and not be forced to take such desperate journeys. 

We coulde gitt no convoye of horse in any towne, for the Kinge had them 
with him, and the convoyes of foote were verie chargeable to me and of littell 
proffitt, never marchinge above two leagues ; which the enemye observed, 
settinge upon us imediately after their departure ; yett did we never receave 
dishonor or losse, but some fewe straglers on foote taken of ours. 

Her Majesties pleasure was, I should weare no armor ; but had I trusted 
more to the priviledge of an ambassador then to the weapons and armes of a 
soldiere, I had ben taken prisoner, wherfore I presume of her Majestie pardon 
therin.i 

By this inclosed your Lordship male perceave such intelligences as my 
purse provideth, which are as deare to me as their victuells and their con- 
voyes ; and I proteste to your Lordship, this journey by the losse and spoile 
of horses, charge of convoyes, giftes and other wise, hath coste me alreadie 
1,000 markes ; yett was I not further from Deepe then fiftie leagues. 

Soe leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, knowinge your tearme 
bussines, I humbly take my leave and ende with my paper. 

Noyon, the 15th of October, 1591.2 

Your Lordship's most bounden, 

Henry Unton. 



LX. 

1591, 

15 Oct. " From the Lord Threasurer; receaved the 23th, by 

Sir Roger WiUiams, at Noyon." 3 

My Lord Ambassador. Since my last writinge unto you the French Am- 
bassador had audience of her Majestie in companie of a servante of the French 

' From this point to the end of the letter the Cottonian draft dififers, inserting passages which were 
afterwards omitted In the copy sent. 

2 In the Bodl. MS. this date is incorrectly written 1630. 

3 The original letter Is found in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 38. 



A, D. 1591.] Ill 

Kinge, beinge one of his chamber, ' wheare he shewed unto her Majestie a 
letter that had been deciphered, sent to him from the French Kinge; by which 
letter beinge dated after his manner the 9th of October, he sought by many 
reasons to move the Queene to remove the offence which he understood by 
Monsr. de Reaux that she had conceived against him for not cominge to Nor- 
mandie accordinge to his promise ; wheras her Majestie in perfourminge her 
promise, and sendinge her forces in the verie beginninge of Auguste, had not 
only been at greate charges therwith without any kinde of proffitt to her, or to 
the Kinge, but had also susteyned some dishonor in the reputation of the 
worlde, as that she had been thereby marked to be so easely abused as the 
worlde might judge. Butt after her Majestie had perused the whole letter, 
she hathe founde no kinde of satisfaction by any reason therin used, but 
gathereth rather thereby more doubte of perfourmance of the King's promise 
at this present ; for his principall argument is in his excuse that thoughe he 
had promised the Queene, yett not beinge in his power to performe it because 
of the doubte which the Almaignes had of the Duke of Parmas cominge in, 
and that therfore they woulde have retoumed if ther Kinge had not comen 
unto them ; wherby he was constrained to change that which he had promissed 
to the Queene. Of this her Majestie gathereth that he male even at this 
present aUeage the like uppon the Duke of Parmas nowe cominge in ; but in 
truthe this his answeare is not agreable to the tyme wherin he should have 
comen into Normandie ; for the promise was made in July, and that he would 
not remaine out of Normandie anie longer then untill the Queenes forces came, 
which was in the beginninge of Auguste, in all which moneth neither was their 
any reporte of the Almaignes cominge in, nor of the Duke of Parmas, so as 
the Kinge had no cause all that moneth to have absented him selfe ; in which 
tyme he contynewed the seege of Noyon, with out givinge knowledge therof 
unto her Majestie; and yett Noyon beinge rendered in the begininge of 
August, he spent all the tyme afterwards in private journeys upp and downe 
before the cominge of the AUmaignes ; so as her Majestie concludeth that as this 
his answeare doth not satisfie her, so howsoever it is, her Majestie maie gather 
the like nowe uppon this promise to come, made the 9th of October, which 
is after our recknoing the 29th of September, and so by that accompte he 
shoulde be marchinge towards Normandie the 7th of our October, or the 16th 
of his by his reckoninge, and also by his recknoinge he pretendeth that he 

' Here commences the Cottonian MS. 



112 [October, 

wilbe before Roan by the laste of his October, which shalbe by our reckoning 
the 21st. 

Thus you doe see what argument her Majestie doth conceive; and therby 
doubtinge whether this his promise wilbe performed ; and yett neverthelesse 
shee hathe ben contented even againste her owne opinion in reason to sende 
the Earle of Essex backe againe ; which if the Kinge shoulde not come accor- 
dinge to his promise, her Majestie saieth she muste repente her selfe. 

And nowe all theise reasons I am commanded to expresse unto you, to the 
intente that you shall imparte the same unto the Kinge, least he should 
thincke that this his late letter sent to his Ambassador had fully satisfied her 
Majestie ; as indeed it hath not. And so her pleasure is you should shewe 
him. She meaneth that you shoulde also not forgett to shewe him the former 
reasons, whereof you were made acquainted with my letters and writings sent 
to you and Sir Thomas Leighton before your departure thence; wherby 
might manifestly appeare what just causes her Majestie had to have revoked 
bothe the Earle and her forces. 

You must also declare to the Kinge howe evell his promisses are performed 
in Brittaigne, wher her Majestie's forces have ben constrayned by the Prince 
and the counsell of Lavardine and others ^ to with drawe from the sea side 
and all that service loste. 

In much hast, 15th of October, 1591. 



Your assured lovinge friend, 

W. BURGHLEY. 



To the right honorable my verie lovinge 
friende. Sir Henery Unton, Knight, her 
Majesties Ambassador in France. 



LXI. 
1591, 

23 Oct. " Coppie of her Majesties firste letter to the Prince of Anhalt."^ 
Elizabetha Dei gratia Anglise, Franciae et Hiberniae Regina, fidei defensatrix, 

' The conclusion of the letter is in Burghley's hand. 

^ A copy of this letter is preserved in the Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 247. See also Rymer's Feed, 
xvi. 130. 



A. D. 1591.J 113 

etc. illustrissimo principi ac domino, Christiano,i principi Anhaldino, comiti 
Ascaniaj, domino Desemesti ac Bernburghi, consanguineo et amico nostro 
charissimo, salutem. 

Illustrissime princeps, consanguinee et amice charissime ; ante aliquot jam 
dies ad excellentiam vestram scripseramus de vestro in Galliam vestrique 
Gerraanici exercitus felici adventu, congratulantes, votisque omnibus summe 
optantes vestro nomini ex tam nobili expeditione honorem Divini Numinis 
favore dari, quem certa spe oranes jam diu percipimus. Speravimus enim 
fore ut rex vero titulo Christianissimus, excercitus vestri viribus suffultus, in 
regno stabilieretur, contra Antichristianam Papae tyrannidem, et regis His- 
panici ejusque conjuratorum iniquas machinationes et potentiam. 

Verum postquam eae litterae scriptae sunt, eo ipso tempore e Germania intel- 
leximus illustrissimum consanguineum nostrum Saxoniae ducem Electorem 
scelerate veneno petitum a Christianee religionis hostibus, eoque flagitio de vita 
periclitari ; ea res nobis incredibilem dolorem inflixit, qui tamen protinus 
sedatus est ex contrario nuncio de ejus convalescentia nobis allato ; quod 
animum nostrum ita gaudio perfudit, ut Deo Optimo et Maximo eo nomine 
immortales gratias ageremus. 

Hoc vero tempore (ea est rerum humanarum repentina mutatio et instabili- 
tas,) iterum nobis aifertur eura ex priori morbo vita functum ; quod quanquam 
aegre et invite credimus, tamen quoniam id multis simul ex locis ad nos scribitur, 
nimis verum esse veremur ; "^ eaque ex re incredibili doloris sensu perstringi- 
mur. Non enim nos ipsce solum fidelissimo amico ejus morte orbatae sumus, 
sed Christiana respublica gravissimum vulnus accepit, sublato tali contra 
tam potentes adversarios propugnatore. In hoc tamen tam irreparabili rei 
ChristiancB damno, de Dei bonitate desperare non decet. Quanquam enim 
talem Ecclesiae protectorem ex deplorato hoc mundo ad aetemae beatitudinis 
fruitionem evocavit; tamen eodem etiam, ut audivimus, tempore terram ab 
Antichristo Romano exoneravit, qui regis Hispani tirannidi igneos semper 
fomites administravit. 

Cum igitur praedictus Saxoniae dux Elector hujus nobilissimae expeditionis 
author fuerit, ut rex Christianissimus eaque inclyta corona sanguisque regalis 
contra Hispanicas A-ires, qui etiam nunc in id regnum intentantur, defenderetur, 
excellentiam vestram tam pro infixo vestro erga ducem demortuum amore, 

' Christian the First, of the branch of Anhalt-Bembarg. See Art. de Vferif. les Dates, iii. 441. 
5 Christian the First, Duke of Saxony, died 25 Sept, 1591, Art. de V^rif. les Dates, iii. 417. 

Q 



114 [October, 

quam pro vestro in Evangelii causam, gravissime per Christianissimi regis 
inimicos hoc tempore oppugnatam, pio zelo, suramopere hortamur ut incsepto 
hoc glorioso cursu persistas ; eosque qui una sunt principes, nobiles, duces, 
praefectos, omni ratione cohortere, ut in primo proposito constanter perseve- 
rent ; quod nos quidem hoc esse interpretamur, non prius e Gallia exire, aut 
ab armis desistere, quam Rex Christianissimus in coronse suse dignitatem 
stabiliatur, ejusque inimici tota Gallia ejiciantur. 

Cui rei conficiendae quanto labore nos insudamus, excellentiam vestram tarn 
ex lis militum copiis quas in variis Gallise partibus stipendiis nostris alemus, 
tam ex pecuniae suppeditatione, quam quotidie exhibemus, facile percipere 
poterit. 

His literis lectis, Excellentiam vestram oramus ut ea quae nostro nomine 
legatus noster relaturus est, audire velit, cui etiam fidem omnem tanquam 
nobismetipsis adhiberi plane voluimus. Ita Excellentiam vestram bene et 
feliciter valere ex animo optamus. 

Datae e Regia nostra Richmondii, Octobris xxiii, 1591. 



LXII. 
1591. 

Oct. 28. " To the Lord Jhreasurer ; sent by Sir Roger Williams 
[Oct. 18.] fromNoyon."! 

My verie good lord : By this bearrer I receaved at his cominge to the 
Kinge, 3 of your letters ; the firste of the 20th of September, the two other 
of the 12th and 15th of this^ moneth. By the firste I perceived her Majesties 
displeasure for my advice of Goumay, and journey to the Kinge, as well for 
the paie of her Majesties forces, as for matters of Brytannye, and conceminge 
the King's cominge to Roan with speed, and the doubtes conceived therof by his 
letter of the 9th of October, and the promise he made to her to be ther by the 
laste of this moneth of October, which after our stile should be the 21st of the 
same. This is the effecte of your Lordship's 3 letters. 

1 The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. contains the 
original draft. Sir Robert Cecyll's letter of the 9 Nov. shows that Unton here dated according to 
the French style ; the real date of this and the following number, LXIII. is therefore 18 October. 

^ Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 115 

I am not a little perjjlexed that her Majestie hath so conceived of me. For 
my advice at Goumay, I did concurre with Sir Thomas Leighton and Mr. 
Killegrewe, — men of farr better experience then my selfe, — and wee all 
three, joyntlye in a letter, did but dehver oure opinions, submittinge the better 
consideration and resolution therof to her Majestie ; for which purpose we ex- 
pressly sent into England before our departure from Deepe, expectinge her 
pleasure, and beinge urged by the Marshall we consented to the march, but 
not to the seege, untill wee perseved the faciUytie of takinge it, and howe 
much it imported the seege before Roan, which only perswaded us to give our 
consentes ; wherin if I have geven offence to her Majestie, it hath proceeded of 
my wante of experience, and shaU teach me hereafter howe to give advise. 

For my cominge to the Kinge, her Majestie by her letters comanded me 
so to doe, and by your Lordships letters I was so required, which I hope 
your Lordship remembreth ; and therefore herin I have not deserved, as I 
suppose, any blame. My humble sute is by your Lordships mediation to 
obteyne her Majestie's gracious pardon, which I hope my better service shall 
raerritt ; otherwise the greife therof will shorten my tyme, and I shall houlde 
myselfe to be the moste unhappy man livinge, 

Concerninge the matters conteyned in your Lordships later letters, I have 
written therof answeare at large to her Majestie, which I hope wiU geive her 
Highnes sufficient knowledge of the Kings resolution therin, and satisfie your 
Lordship ; and the Kinge promised me to write amply of that and of my 
whole negotiation with him, and thereby to enforme her Majestie of his 
answeares, which I partely desired him to doe that her Majestie might not 
alleadge any misunderstandinge of him. 

My former letters sente by John le Roy miscarried, for he was taken 
prisoner by them of Picardie ; the coppie wherof I sende your Lordship herin- 
closed, houldinge it necessarie so to doe in these dangeros tymes ; but my 
former from Champaigne I hope your Lordship hathe receaved. I assure your 
Lordship I will not herafter be so hastie to take a badd journey, with out her 
Majesties expresse commandement, and then will I preferr her service 
before myne owne lief, which desire did so only carry me this journey, as so 
first commanded. 

Of the Kings manner of receavinge me, and of my whole negotiation with 
him, I have presumed to write to her Majestie at large ; ' assuringe your 

1 See the following letter ; No. LXIII. 



116 [October, 

Lordship, I finde by his words greate affection, and in his discourse a good 
and sharpe judgement, greate memory, quick conceipt, and readie answears. 
He was at the laste well pleased with my plaine manner of dealinges and 
proceadings ; and when I pressed his resolutions, especially for monies, he 
would seeke all occasiones of evasion. Att length he discovered his wantes to 
me, promisinge hereafter he would deale more plainelye with her Majestic and 
acknowledge his errors. 

The Kings armye nowe hasteneth with all speed to the seedge of Roan, 
where he resolveth to be within fifteene daies, and hath commanded the 
Marshall to invest parte of the towne before his cominge ; but he cannott 
beginne to batter it this sixs weeks, in respecte 6 of his cannons are here 
at Compaigne and cannot be suddenly conveyed theither ; also moste of his 
munition is at Mantes ; to bothe which places he muste sende his horses 
of carriadge, which are nowe with the Marshall; yett will he make his 
approaches presentley uppon his cominge theither, which will aske some tyme, 
and prepare all things necessarie. He resolveth whether the Duke of Parma 
come or noe, to begine and continewe his seege, and foUowe her Majestie's 
dirrections ; " for," saied he, " if I take not Roan nowe, bothe my honor and 
kingdome are loste; and by wynninge of that I shall possesse my kingdome, 
and also by wyninge of that I shall not only possess my kingdome shortly 
after, and so assure the rest of his Townes.'' 

Manie feare most the mutynie of the German army for wante of pay ; and 
if that breake, all his hope is in vaine ; for his Catholickes are apte uppon the 
least occasion to rebell; and his townes, wherin he hath not verie stronge 
garrysons, ready to revolt, unlesse he will change his relligion, which they 
nowe urge verie greatly, requiringe him accordinge to promise to be instructed 
in the Catholicke faith ; and they begine in many places to persecute them of 
the relligion, and will not permitt the Kinge to geive them any manner of 
preferment, and are verie jallous when they perceive him to conferr with them ; 
which dothe discontente them, and greiveth the Kinge not alittell, as him selfe 
hath pleased to confesse unto me. 

I assure your Lordship, the estate of the Kinge is moste miserable, and him 
selfe as it were forcible governed by the Cathohckes ; the people malitiously 
bente againste him, through out all France; the garrisons in the townes 
consume all his revennewes ; his povertie great, and hath no assurance of any 
his subjectes, but of them of the relligion, who are fewe in number and of 



A. D. 1591.J 117 

smale power, yett doth he poUitickly temporise with them ; all which best 
shewes his discretion; and is followed of all the nobillitie all moste, but 
in what manner your Lordship best knoweth, which is to come and departe at 
their pleasures. 

The Kinge confesseth nowe he is unable to paie your Majestie's forces 
accordinge to the accorde, and if her Majestie revoke her forces he saieth his 
armye wiU breake, and that he shalbe forced to leave the feild and loose his 
crowne, and I assure your Lordship, I beleive his wantes are greate, or eUs he 
woulde not suffer his armye to mutyne for wante of money. Wherfore your 
Lordship must hope nothinge therof, albeit Monsr. Do did faithfully promise 
it, and her Majestie is pressed nowe by the Kinge for further supplies ; the 
consideration wherof I leave to her Majestie's wisdome, and have discoraged 
the Kinge from any hope to prevaile therein, with which speach of myne he 
seemed for the time to be discontented, and was in the end well pleased. 

Touchinge the supplies of Bryttaigne, he promiseth speedely to have care 
therof; havinge receaved newes that the Duke Mercure is master of the feilde ; 
and ymediately after the takinge of Roan, he resolveth to make warr in that 
countrey himselfe with moste parte of his armye. I urged nowe the sendinge 
some of his Reyters, which he saied he was not nowe able to doe in respecte 
of the seege of Roan, neither should he be able to make seperation of them so 
farr of from their owne countrey, and that the army was not nowe so greate as 
he expected, for it consisted in all but of 4,500 horse (wherof he lefte 1,000 
with Monsr. de Nevers,) of 5,000 Lansquenetts, and of 1 ,600 VYallons and of 
other nations. 

The Duke de Mayne is at Rhetel, and intendeth to march after the Kinge, 
when the Duke of Lorraynes [armye cometh to him. The whole armye, 
when they are altogether, will consist of some 10,000 foote and 1,000 horse 
.... all the pope's armye, the Duke of Lorraynes] ' and the Duke de Maynes 
forces with the Prince of Ascolys ; parte wherof we hope the Popes death, 
which is nowe assured,^ wiU force to retourne. 

From Provence the Kinge was yesterday advertised that some 3,000 
Spaniards were ther landed, which is not probable, and that the Duke of Savoy 

' The passage included within brackets occurs in both the Draft and the Original Letter; but it is 
omitted in the Bodleian Manuscript. 

2 It appears by a letter from the College of Cardinals, which is found in the Cottonian MS. Calig. 
E. viii. fol. 50, that Pope Gregory XIV. died on the evening of the 1.5th of October. 



118 [October, 

did intende to beseege the cheefeste townes which hould for the Kinge ; but 
his defeate of his late forces in Savoy by Monsr. de Diguieries hath greately 
discontented him, which newes is daihe confirmed, and that over thro we will 
hinder his dessignes. 

The harte-burninge betweene the Duke of Mayne and the Duke of Guise 
conteynueth ; but is wel coloured and in outward shewe dissembled, and they 
no we joyne together with their forces. 

Some secreett intelligence I have receaved of some of good creditt, that 
Monsr. de Guise would marrye with the Kings sister and endevor to make a 
peace, and advance his greatnes by foUowinge the Kinge, wherin his mother is 
a great instrument, and the Duke well enclined. Hereof I will enquire more 
dilligently, albeit I see noe likelyhoode or probabillitye herof ; but I finde them 
generally desirous of peace, and wourkinge all meanes to bringe it to passe ; 
which I houlde to be impossible duringe the Kinge of Spaines lief. Hereof 
your Lordship male please to advertise her Majestie. 

By letters lately intercepted in cipher, of the CardinallofBurbones writinge, 
there appereth a conspiracy against the Kinge between him and Monsr. 
D'Espernon, and that they would presently revolte if the Kinge did not alter 
his religion ; and it is the more probable, for that the saied Duke D'Espernon 
hath forced them of the relligion out of his goverment verie lately, and will 
not publishe the revocation of the Edict ; and it is saied the Cardinall hathe 
attempted the Hke. This conspiracie is kepte very secrett, and therfore of 
your Lordship to be concealled, and only to acquainte her Majestie here 
with, for it may otherwise be prejudicyall to the Kinge. This is as much as 
I can leame and wourthy the wrightinge. And as I encrease in my ex- 
perience and knowledge, so will I encrease your Lordship's trouble with my 
tedious letters. And so I humbly take my leave. 

Noyon, this 28th of October, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Since the writinge of this letter the Kinge Henry Unton. 

is advertised that the Duke de Mayne and 
Duke de Guise, with their armye, are 
within two leagues of the King's armye. 



A. D. 1591.J 119 



LXIII. 

1591, 

28 Oct. " To her Majestic ; sent by Roger Williams, from Noyon." ^ 

[18 Oct.] 

Maie it please your moste excellent Majestie to be advertised that the 13th 
of this moneth I receaved commandement from the Kinge, beinge then within 
eight leagues of him, to retourne to this towne, where he promised to be 
within 3 or 4 dales, expresslie to geive me audience, whether I retourned ac- 
cordinge to his ^ pleasure ; notwithstandinge the Kinge came not before the 
20th, and verie late in the nighte, slenderly followed, havinge traveled that 
day 17 leagues, yet ymediately after his cominge he was pleased to sende one of 
his Secretaries to visit me, and to oifer me audyence the next day at 3 of the 
clocke in the afternone; longinge greatly, as he said, to heare from your 
Majestie. 

The nexte morninge, contrary to expectation, he sente for me to come in 
all haste to the Courte ; whether I repaired ymediatly, and was receaved by 
the Kinge in a large courte, where requiringe me to walke with him, he be- 
ganne first to enquire of your Majesties health, wishinge the continewance 
therof, and acknowledged your many favors, and that extraordinary, with some 
other ceremonies. 

Then he imparted unto me that he was presentlie to departe, beinge adver- 
tised of a greate mutyne and sudden departure of his Lansquenetts, and 
Wallons towarde the enemie, which was the cause he sente for me to desier 
me to differ my audience, and spare the delivery of my letters untill his re- 
tourne ; which should be, as he saied, within 2 or 3 dales ; as also to ac- 
quainte me with that ill newes, and with some other of greate importance, as 
the deathe of the Duke of Saxe, which was as yett concealled from the armye. 
" Theis newes," saied he, " will be my overthrowe ; for if the Lansquenetts 
and Wallons doe revolt in this manner, the Reiters then, uppon knowledge of 

' A copy in the handwriting of Sir Henry Unton is in the State Paper Office ; and another copy 
is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 190. It is printed from the latter in Rymer's 
Feed. xvi. 131, where it is erroneously said to have been written by Sir R. Williams. 

- Here begins the draft in the Cottonian Manuscript. 



120 [October, 

the Dukes death, will also retourne," wheruppon he saied his Catholickes 
who where apt to altar with his fortune, would also forsake him, and the 
Princes of blood who feared him and loved him not would then take ther 
tyme to execute their malice. Also he saied the greatest parte of the townes 
nowe holdinge for him, would their uppon yeald to the enemye ; " so," saied 
he, " the enemye will increase their strength by my decay and I shalbe 
utterly abandoned and forsaken ; " yett he saied his only comforte was in God, 
who had heitherto preserved him, and advanced him to the crowne rather by 
miracles then meanes, and was able of stones to raise men. Theise as I re- 
member were his verie wordes, uttered with much passion and greife of 
mynde; wherunto, after due ceremonies and ordinary salutations donne, I 
made such answeare as mighte in my poore opinion best comforte him, and 
hasten his journey to the armye, comendinge his godly patience and princely 
resolution ; and so tooke my leave, as sorry to see him so perplexed. 

The 21st of this moneth the Kinge retourned backe to this towne, where 
vouchsafinge to call at my lodginge, he was pleased to lett me knowe that all 
was appeased, and his Lansquenetts and Wallons retourned by the meanes of 
the Prince Danhault and the Baron de Byron, who when they coulde not 
prevaile with anie manner of perswasions, threatened to cutt them in peeces 
rather then they should goe to the enemie, and so forced them to come to 
the armye, were they remaine yett in good order. 

I demanded audience the next daie, which was grawnted, and the hower 
appointed was 3 of the clocke in the afternoone ; when as I attended, beinge 
verie well accompanied, and assone as I entred within the courte I was 
brought into the Kings cabynett, where he receaved me verie privately, com- 
mandinge all out of the place, and willinge me to sitt downe in a chaire by 
him. After due salutations, I delivered your Majesties two first letters ; re- 
servinge the other two letters of your Majesties owne hand untill I had by 
my speach made my selfe some what acceptable to the Kinge, and had 
gathered some better knowledge of his humours and disposition ; which after 
he had redd, I shewed him the greate charge your Majestic gave me to directe 
my course in this service, as might best tend to the advancement of God's 
glory and his trewe religion, as also for the maintenance of the good and per- 
fecte amytie which was betweene your Majesties, and of the free traficque and 
entercourse betwene the subjectes of bothe your realmes ; which I saied, I 
would not faile to observe with all due care and true sinceritie, and therfore 



A. D. 1591.] 121 

desired him that if any should endevor to procure him to conceive otherwise 
of me, that I mighte then be admitted to my answeare, wherin I doubted 
not to satisfie him and justifie my selfe. 

Wherunto he answeared, that he had sufficient experience of your Majesties 
goodnes and extraordinary favors, and that without them he neither had ben 
or ever should be able to weare and keepe his crowne uppon his head ; " but," 
saied he, " I cannott doe as other Princes, who use many ceremonies and no 
love, but will ever use all love and few ceremonies towards my deare sister, 
your Soveraigne ; and all I can offer," saied he, " is to fight for her and be- 
come her captaine, hopinge she wilbe my best counseUer," Also he saied he 
did the rather assure him selfe of the continewance of your Majesties good 
and perfecte amitie ; for that you had made choise of me to supply this place, 
so well inclyned therunto, as he understood by his Ambassador I was ; wher- 
fore he assured me I was wellcome, and should att all tymes receave at his 
handes for your Majesties sake gracious audience ; for the which I rendred 
him humble thanckes, hopinge I should doe nothinge unworthy of such good 
opinion. 

Theise ceremonies ended, I declared that your Majestic willed me to lett 
him knowe that you, as his lovinge sister, who wished unto him aU pros- 
peritie, was sorry that he had not such due regarde of the preservation of 
Bryttany as yt did importe him and accordinge to the promises made by his 
Ambassador to your Majestic, who had not otherwise sente your forces thither 
as auxillarie ; wherin I used such further speech, reasons, and arguments, as 
by your Majesties directions and my Lorde Threasurer's letters I receaved in 
charge, and delivered unto him the state of his army there, and of that 
countrie from tyme to tyme, as also the withdrawinge of Sir John Norrys 
from the marratyme higher into the countrey ; assuringe him that unlesse he 
would be pleased to send and continewe better supplies then heretofore had 
ben, and nowe were there, your Majestic should be forced to revoke your 
forces ther, for that the Spaniards dayly encreased in nomber and the Eng- 
lishe in a manner abandoned. 

To this the King answeared that the state of the whole countrey of France 
was such as he could not absolutely commande his nobillytie and dispose of 
them as he woulde, for that they served without paie uppon their owne ex- 
penses, and therfore would retourne at their pleasure to there bowses ; yett 
had the Kinge earnestlv comanded them of Brittaigne, and appointed some to 

R 



122 [October, 

supply when others departed, as Monsr. de Lorge, who faithfully promissed 
him not to faile to obey his commandement, and did not ; " but," saied he, 
" I will presentley satisfye her Majestic herin with a supply ; " and after 
the takinge of Roan he saied he would onely make warre in that country and 
reduce it to quietnes. 

Then I used some speeches of his untymely hastening your Majesties 
forces; his losse of tyme at this towne ; his journey to theReyters; his 
breache of promise in not accelleratinge his forces to the seege of Roan, and 
the inconveniences therof ; lastely, his uncerteyne resolution therin, and some 
times alteration of opinion ; of aU which he saied he had given your Majestic 
as he hoped, by his last letters of the 9th of October, sufficient satisfaction, 
and would nowe more fully, in these his letters nowe sente, write therof. 

Wherunto I replyed that I was lately advertised by my Lord Threasurer's 
letters that your Majestic by the saied letters rather conceaved newe doubtes 
then any manner of satisfaction ; for as by the same letter he alleadged for his 
excuse of stay, the cominge of the Duke of Parma into France, your Majestic 
conceived the same excuse might heraftcr be alledged for his not cominge at 
all to Roan ; and therin that wheras the Kinge promised by the saied letter to 
be at Roan with his armyc the lastc of October, stylo novo, he had also 
broken that promise, which might justely breed newe doubtes in your Ma- 
jesties minde. 

To this he answeared with protestation that your Majestic should well per- 
ceive, whether the Duke of Parma come or not, that he would bothe beginc 
and continewe the seege of Roan, and therin followc only your Majesties di- 
rections, and he would not faile within fifteene dales to be before it, which I 
do beleive, for he maketh all manner of preparations for the same, and his 
armyc marcheth ; " and as concerninge my breach of promise," saied he, " in 
not cominge before Roan by the lastc of October, the causes wherof arc 
three ; first, the heavynes of the Reyters, who marcheth 3 dales and will then 
rest 2 ; " secondly, the difficultic he had to make scperation of the two com- 
panies of the Reyters, for Monsr. dc Nevers ; lastely, the deathe of the Duke 
of Saxe and mutinic of his army. These were the reasons he alleadged for 
the same. 

In my lastc speech, I signified unto the Kinge that your Majestic did not a 
littell marveile he would breake the contracte in not payinge of your forces 
after the expiration of the two monethes, and that the Marshall Byron and 



A. D. 1591.] 123 

Monsr. Do had also promised often their paie, but never performed it ; wher- 
fore I was commanded to require present paiement, accordinge to the accorde, 
or else some good assurance for yt ; otherwise for wante of paie your Majestic 
should be forced to revooke them ; and that such was your resolution. 

To this the Kings answeared that he would use his best meanes to make 
paie for them, and doubted not to performe it verie shortely ; but assurance 
he could give non better then your Majestic had by the accord. 

Then I urged your Majesties revocation of them, and requested him to shewe 
me the meanes he had to pay them, for I found his army ready to breake for 
wante therof, and that he would entertaine your Majestic noe longer with 
wourds and make me an instrument to abuse your Highnes. And uppon this 
my pressinge of him, he made answeare, he was loathe to discover his poore 
estate, and loathe to abuse your Majestic ; " for," saied he, " I must neede 
confesse I am not able to pay them, and my wantes are so greate, as I have 
not 500 crownes in my purse, nor where with all to pay my armye, but the 
money which Normandie hath promised for the seege of Roan. " This," 
saied he, " is my estate ; and if the Queene your mistris revooke her forces 
then will the German armye departe ; and then every one," saied he, " can 
judge of my successe ; wherfore," saied he, " if this be my Sisters resolution, 
it is in vaine for me to goe before Roan, and to march theither with my 
armye," and so seemed resolved to stay. Theruppon I replyed that albeit I 
did knowe your Majesties resolution to be such, yett his cominge Mith 
speede before Roan might the rather move you to pleasure him, wherof I 
would give him no manner of hope ; but, as of my selfe, wished him rather 
to hould that corse, which he then saied he would willingly performe, what- 
soever should become of him. Not withstandinge he desired to have your 
Majestie's present resolution, and marcheth with all dilligence with his armye, 
preparinge all thinges necessary for the seege. 

When I perceived him to be againe thus well disposed, I delivered your 
Majestie's two other letters, which after he had throughly perused, he saied 
he could not but confesse some of his errors, and would strive to make your 
Majestic amendes for the same ; " for," saied he, " the Queene my Sister's 
discontentement dothe greive me moste of any worldly thinge, who is my 
only supporte." 

I thoughte it my duty to send your Majestic the effecte of that I saied to 
the Kinge, and in the same manner, wherby you maie judge whether I kepte 



124 [October, 

my selfe within compasse, and wherin I faj'Ued; wherof beinge by your 
Highnes admonished, I may herafter avoide the like, and in the meane tyme 
humbly crave pardon of my errors. 

After I had concluded my speech, which, together with his, continewed two 
howers, the Kinge desired me to recommend certayne requests he had to 
make to your Majestic, necessary for the saied seege ; which were, the rein- 
forcinge ^our Majesties forces in Normandie, the payment of them duringe 
the seege, the present levye of 1,000 pyonners, the sendinge of 120 can- 
nonyres, the lendinge of 80 last of powder, (for the which he saied your 
Majestie should have good assurance of present paiemente of sufficient mar- 
chants of London, before the delivery therof,) lastely, that your Majestie 
would duringe the seege permitt some of your navy to keepe the seas, that 
no succor maie passe to the enemy. Also he cravede your Majestie's letters 
to the Princes Protestants of Germany, to continue their forwardnes to the 
Kinge. 

To this I made answeare that I was sorry he did so littell respecte your 
Majestie, as, in lieu of a satisfaction, to importune you with newe requestes 
of such charge, wherof I could assure him littell likelyhood ; remembringe 
particularly your Majesties greate sommes disbursed since his cominge to the 
crowne, as also your greate charges ells where ; and therfore wished the 
Kinge rather to forbeare your Majestie then gieve you offence by such de- 
mandes. " I perceive,'' saied he, " you are unwillinge to further my good in 
this my necessitie, which shalbe repaid at the takinge of Roan ; but," saied 
he, " I hope better of you herafter then I finde in the beginninge, onely I 
request you to write my necessities and requestes, and leave aU to my Sisters 
the Queens resolution and due consideration. And," saied he, " my selfe 
will earnestly entreate her by my letters to favor me so much, and wiU send 
Sir Roger Williams therwith, who knowethe my estate, and understandeth 
wherof I have neede at this seege ; who," saied he, " will make haste to re- 
tourne." And so we concluded ; wheruppon I departed from the Kinge. 

This is, as neare as my memory can serve me, all that hath been in this ne- 
gociation either delivered by me, or receaved from the Kinge ; and I humbly 
submitt the same to your Majestie's wisdome and consideration. ' And soe I 
humbly cravyinge. pardon for what soever I have done amisse, beseeche the 
Almightie longe to preserve your Majestie in all prosperitie. 

' Here ends the copy contained in the Cottonian Manuscript. 



A. D. 1591.] 125 

From Noyon, the 28th of October, 1591. 

Your Majesties moste humble and 

obedient servant and subjecte. 

To the Queenes moste Henry Unton. 

excellent Majestic. 



LXIV. 
1591, 

29 Oct. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 13th of 

November, by Mr. Smith." ' 

My Lord Ambassador, you shall understand that her Majestic havinge here 
reported out of Germainie diverslie of the Duke of Saxe, firste that he was 
dead uppon poison, and afterwardes that he was recovered, and "^ nowe lastly 
that in truthe he should be dead, although not knowne in what sorte ; yett 
beinge an accydent at this tyme verie unseasonable, consideringe the reputa- 
tion he had amonge aU the Protestants of Germanic, and namely, some what 
doubtefuU howe the Prince of Anhalt and the army wilbe affected uppon this 
accydent; — for theise causes her Majestic hathe thought it verie convenient to 
addresse her letters to the Prince of Anhalt, * beinge the generall of the 
Almaigne armye nowe in France, by the which shee dothe signifie to him what 
reporte shee hathe of late had of the Dukes death ; which, thoughe it be not 
very certeine, yett doubtinge of the worste shee dothe exorte him by manie 
greate reasons not to alter his purpose by that occasion if it should be true, 
but that he and all the coUenells and captaines would consider howe honor- 
able an action it is for them to continewe the enterprise, beinge for the 
preservation of a most Christian Kinge in the possession of his crowne ; and 
in the ende of her letter she dothe require him to give credite unto you, as her 
ambassador, in such things as you shall in her behalfe imparte unto him. 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 40. 
' Here the Cottonian MS. commences. 
' See No. LXI. 



126 [October, 

And therfore of this her Majesties writinge to the Prince you shall acquainte 
the French Kinge, and knowe of him what he shall like to be saied by you to 
the Prince from her Majestic in furtherance of his affaires, over and besides 
these former reasons which I doe advertise you to be touched in her Majestie's 
letters ; savinge you shall forbeare to make any promise in her Majesties name 
for any further charges on her parte, further then already shee hath beene at 
in Germannie with the somme of 30,000 crownes, and more, and in Nor- 
mandie and Brittaigne above 100,000 crownes, besides the continuance still in 
Brittaignie of other charges ; which I doe the more particularlie expresse unto 
you, because you may be informed therof to answeare to anie newe demandes 
that male be made by the French Kinge, or the Prince of Anhalte. Thus much 
of that matter of the Prince of Anhalt, whose letter I doe sende herewith. 

Since your departure out of Normandie towards the Kinge wee have never 
hearde from you, nor howe yowe have passed ; neither have any of ours att 
Deepe hearde of you, as by their letters of late hathe ben hither certefied, 
thoughe they hoped shortely to heare from you by the meanes of Sir Roger 
Williams, whom the Earle of Essex hath sent to the Kinge. And yett, by the 
reportes of the Marshall of Byron, the Kinge should be come on his way, and 
his vangarde comen before to Gisors, and that they looked for the Kinges 
cominge to Roan by the laste of this monethe, which ought to have ben the 
21th no we by our reckoninge, six dales past. But of theise accomptes I make 
small acompte, havinge so many former accomptes broken; wherwith her 
Majestie hathe ben and yet is so deeply offended, as I see nothinge male satis£e 
her to contynue her kindnes to that Kinge but his speedy retourne or repaire 
to Roan, and perfourmance of his covenantes in paiement of her people that 
be ther ; wherin it is good to make you acquainted what hath ben donne ; 
doubtinge that neither the Earle, nor anie the Queenes counsellors with him, 
hath geven you advertisement. But thus it is, after the two monethes end 
and when the army should have been paied by the Kinge, there was noe order 
taken for the same, but many good wourdes that when Monsr. Do should 
come into these partes, and that he was then cominge, they should be satis- 
fyed ; and duringe that expectation the Queenes Threasurer havinge money for 
ther chardges of transportation, (which charge also should have ben paied by 
the Kinge,) that money was paied to the army for their necessities for 14 dales 
wages. And then Monsr. Do cominge, he saied that he must needs first goe 
to Caen to procure money, and soe he and Saldaigne went theither, and at 



A. D. 1591.] 127 

their retourne have promissed to pay to the armye 14 daies paye uppon a 
newe muster, and in the meane tyme there hathe ben allowed to the army a 
certaine quantitie by the daie of bread, fishe, and beare, but much lesse then 
was needfull. But what will nowe followe for further continewance of them 
in service by the French Kinge, I know not ; and therfore I doe informe you 
of this much, that soe you may treate with the French Kinge and such of the 
counsell which are beste addicted to the cause, to bringe the matter to some 
certentie ; for before the ende of November her Majestic meaiieth to revoke 
them, excepte the French Kinge male by some good meanes move her to the 
contrary. 

In like manner you may advertise him howe owre power in Brittaigne is 
there, to the greate coaste of her Majestic and small profitt for service ; for 
that the Prince Dombes hathe noe power to attempte any thinge to the 
offence of the enemye; for that Laverdin, Mountgomary and others, that have 
promised to bringe forces theither, will bringe none further then to the 
frontiers of Brittaigne and Normandie; and when they come theither they 
make noe aboade above 12 or 14 daies at a tyme, so that the Prince and her 
Majestie's generall Sir John Norrys, are forced to use ther powers only for 
defence, beinge not able to offende the enemye ; wherby her Majestic taketh 
her charges utterly loste, and mindeth to revooke them ; and this her Majesty 
would have you informe the Kinge. 

We doe heare a reporte of the Pope's death, but howe trewe it is we knowe 
not ; but certenlie if it be, it is beste knowen to the Kinge there ; wherfore 
I pray you seeke to be informed and advertise us bothe of that, and of the 
reportes that are spreade abroade of a victorye had by De Diguieres and 
Alfonso de Corso against the Duke of Savoy and his bastarde brother Amedeo; 
wherof, and of the hke you may require the King's Secretarys of estate that 
they would from tyme to tyme geive you knowledge ; and so I doubte 
not but you will after your arryvall there advertise us from tyme to tyme. 
And so I make an ende of a longe letter, because I have seldome leasure to 
write often. 

' After I had written thus farr I understand that a pacquett of yours was 
with the messenger distressed, wherof I am verie sorry; wishinge you to 
double your letters in case of importtance, I heare also that you had ben at 
Compeigne, and was to have accesse within two or three daies to the Kinge ; 

' The letter contained in the Cottoniao MS. from this point to the end is in Burghley's handwriting. 



128 [November, 

soe as I hope, by the nexte to heare freshe news of your retourninge with the 
Kinge towardes Roan. 

From the Corte at Rychmonde, the 29th of October, 1591. 

Your verie assured lovinge freinde. 

To the right honorable my verie W. Burghley. 

lovinge freinde, Sir Henery Unton, 
Knight, her Majestie's Ambassador 
in Fraunce. 



LXV. 

1591, • 

6th Nov. " To the Lord Chancellor ; by Harvey," 

My verie good Lord. Albeit my wante of leisure and of fitt place in this 
camp win not suffer me to write much, yett could I not nowe forbeare to write 
some what to your Lordship to contynue my dilligence and shewe of deuty to 
your Lordship, to whom I am most bound. 

By the coppie of my letter sent to my Lord Threasurer,i and hereinclosed, 
your Lordship may perceive the occasion of this my sudden dispatch, and 
such advertisements as this countrie yealdeth, and some others ; beinge sorrie 
as yet my service bringeth forth noe better fruites. But the King's want of 
advice, the danger of passages, and this runinge campe, are the causes I can 
geive noe better advertisements. And I assure your Lordship I have em- 
ployed one aboute the Leaguers, an other in Itallie, and many in diverse pro- 
vinces of Fraunce, besides some neare the Kinge, and aboute his secretarys ; 
sparinge no expenses to make my service acceptable to her Majestic, 

Since my last letters of ^ to your Lordship by Sir Roger Williams, we 
have marched towards Roan through Pycardi, the greatest parte wherof 
holdeth for the enemy, wherby our journey is the more prolonged; yett 
within eight dales the army wilbe before Roan, beinge from thenc above 20 
leagues. 

The Kinge is followed altogether by straingers, without any nomber of 
French, who mutyne daUy for wante of paie and burne most villages wher 

' See the last letter. ^ No date is introduced in the Bodleian manuscript. 



A. D. 1591.] 129 

they lodge, — to the great discontentment of the Kinge and greife of his good 
subjects, — which they doe very dispitefiilly. 

The state of Fraunce is most misserable and lamentable, and the necessi- 
ties of the poore Kinge such as he is forced to give over his tables in coste ; 
and in a manner, himselfe wanteth breadd to eate. If I were not an ey witt- 
nesse herof I could not beleeve it. 

I feare much the revolt of this his army before Roan, when he shall want 
money to paie them, which may greately hinder his enterprise and wourke his 
overthrowe ; for all his good dependeth upon the good successe of his army. 

He is a most noble, brave, King ; of greate patience and magnamynitie ; 
not ceremonious, aflFable, famillier and only followed for his trewe vallour ; 
but very much hated for his relhgion, and threattoned by the Catholiques to 
forsake him if he converte not. 

I am loathe to hold your Lordship any longer with my idle discorses, and 
crave pardon for my hasty scribles, bothe nowe and in my last letters. 

And so in all hast, with all duty, I humbly take my leave, 6th November, 
1591. 

Yours whoUy to commande, 

H. Unton. 



[1591, LXVI. 

6 Nov.] " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Harvey." 

It male please your Lordship to advertise her Majestic that the Kinge 
dothe earnestly crave the ayde of some fewe shippes of hers to come before 
Newhaven, and their to remaine duringe the seege of Roan, to hinder the 
passage of the enemy; otherwise, he saieth, they intende to sende 2,000 
Spaniards to the succor of Roan, which will altogether hinder his enterprise. 
Also, he urgeth with as greate instance to obteyne two of her Majestie's pin- 
naces, to keepe the ryver of Seyne, and to continewe ther ; with out the which 
he saieth he [will] not [be] able to commande the ryver ; wherof the Marshall 
Byron hath advertised him in all haste by letters, requestinge him earnestly 



130 [November, 

to presse her Majestie's favor therin as a matter of greatest importance and 
necessity for the seege. The Kinge was pleased to shewe me the letters, and 
required me with all speede to make a dispatch hereof; which he saied he 
would also recommend by his spetiall letters to her Majestie ; whereunto I 
made some difficultie, alleaginge her Majesties former and daily expenses for 
his ayde, and his contynuall requestes with out respecte, and that I was sorry 
my service their did bringe no manner of satisfaction to her Majestie's desires, 
but rather importunancies of newe desires or requestes, to her insupportable 
charge. 

This answeare of myne moved the Kinge very much ; wheruppon he replied 
that it was not his will to importune her Majestie, neither his unwillingnes to 
contente her in whatsoever, but his meere necessities which compelled him 
ther unto ; hopinge in shorte tyme after the takinge of Roan, to bringe to her 
Majestie some manner of satisfaction, then the which he saied he desired 
nothinge more, as might appeare by this his journey to Roan, undertaken 
onley to contente her Majesties goodnes, againste the will of moste of his 
Catholickes and divers of the provinces. His conclusion was he had expected 
better fruites of my service here, then as yett he founde ; and requested me 
verie earnestly to advertise her Majestie herof with my beste furtherance ; 
presuminge much, as he saied, of her Majesties goodnes in this which should 
also tende to her good. 

To this I answered that I was gladd he had so greate good will to give her 
Majestie contentement, but sorrye that this necessitie should be so burthen- 
some to her Majestie, as my selfe did knowe they had ben, and muste be 
if her Majestie were pleased to yeald therunto; and therfore desired him 
to spare her Majestie and to excuse my unwillingnes, forced uppon myne 
owne knowledge of her Majestie's expenses, and so did particularise some 
what therin. Notwithstandinge, I saied her Majestie should be advertised 
herof accordinge to his desire, but my furtherance could prevaile little. And 
if I did not take this course with the Kinge, I assure your Lordship he would 
importune her Majestie more than he dothe, imagininge her treasures to be 
infinitt, and her peace to bringe all plenty and httle expense. I doe finde his 
disposition better ; sometymes he demandeth whether the citty will not lend 
him 200,000 crownes to pay his Reyters, and divers such like money 
demands, which maketh me deale the more plainly with him, and obstare 



A. D. 1591,] 131 

The Kinge hath also sent to the States to ayde him with the like shipinge 
for his enterprise of Roan, which he did uppon my former speach ; otheninse 
he had pressed her Majestie to fumishe him wholly there with. I doubt not 
but he shall have very greate wante of this shippinge he nowe demands, and 
of the pynnases ; and therfore am the more %Tillinge to advertise her Majestie 
of his requestes, leavinge it to her princely consideration. 

The Kinge with his whole army marcheth with all diligence towards Roan, 
where they intend to be within eight daies. But he with some thirtie horse 
will hasten before to Deepe, to take order for diverse thinges necessary 
for the seege, wher he wilbe the 9th of this moneth, and departe the next day 
to Roan; this is his resolution. 

The Reyters and Lansquenetts have all mutined since my last letters and 
utterly refused to march with out present pay; to whome the Kinge ymediatly 
sent his Secretaries and others of his Counsell, who with verie much difficulty 
prevailed with them, only by meanes of Prince Danhalt, and the rest of the 
cheef leadors givinge to some 2 or 3 of the coUonells and reytemasters monei 
under hande ; otherwise they had all revolted and retourned ; and if the death 
of the Duke of Saxe had ben then known to the multitude, as it was and is 
yett concealed from them by the Princs meanes, — they would not have staied 
for any perswations. Uppon the King's promise of payment within 14 dayes, 
they are nowe contented to staie ; which I knowe cannott be throughlie per- 
formed, and therfore I feare ther revolt herafter. 

The whole army marcheth through Picardie to spoile the enemie, who 
enjoyeth most parte therof, which maketh the Kinge stay the longer by 
the waie, for it is much aboute, yett very necessary to spare his good 
subjects. 

The last of October the Bishopps of Beauvois, Angers, and ^Mantes came to 
the Kinge to Noyon, as sent from the cardenalls and the reste of the clergie, 
to requeste the Kinge to be instructed in ther Catholick faith, accordinge to 
his promise here to fore made ; as also to urge him to make a peace with the 
Leagures, which they all desired, usinge muche and very many perswations to 
move him there unto. To whome the Kinge answered ; that concerninge the 
first pointe of ther speech, he never refused instruction. And that this was 
a very unfitt [time] to urge him therin, consideringe his greate affaires nowe 
in hand. And for the other parte of there speech, he wished them to use 
ther best meanes to make ther owne peace, and uppon reasonable conditions 



132 [November, 

he would yeeld therunto ; " but " [said] he " [I] will resolve your letter at 
my cominge to Roan, when I shall meet with my counsell ; and then shall you 
have a more perfect answer." And they departed well contented. I can 
assure your Lordship they doe all generally desire a peace, for the Leagures 
feare much the death of the Kinge of Spaine, and the Royallists. 

From beepe the Kinge is advertised by letters of good creditt that the 
Duke of Guise, beinge att Artell in Champaigne was attempted to be slaine 
by a souldier, who offeringe to discharge his pistoU upon him, failed; wher- 
uppon he was taken and executed, and confessed to his death that the Duke 
of Mayne hyred him ther unto. If this be trewe then doth yt comfirme my 
former advertisements touchinge the Duke of Guise. I dare not yett beleeve, 
althoughe the Kinge assureth it. 

The deputies of Paris lately retourned from the generall assemblee of the 
Leagures at Rehsmes, and are much discontented ; so are most of the rest ; the 
particulars wherof I cannott as yett learne. 

It is advertised that the conclave at Rome have comanded the Popes 
army to followe ther former directions, and to joine with the Leagures ; but 
many of them were disbanded and departed before the receipt of those letters, 
and the number is not great that remaine. 

The cominge of the Duke of Parma is doubtfuU, yett much feared by the 
Kinge ; and it is advertised that the Duke of Parma intendeth to beseege 
Chawney, and Noyon, and other townes in Pycardie, to diverte the King's 
seege; which he notwithstandinge, resolveth to contynue, and to make a 
calvacado with 2,000 or 3,000 horse towards the [Duke of] Parma, if he 
attempted any of those partes. 

The armye of the Duke de Mayne is at Guise, and maketh shewe to march 
after the Kinge ; but it is thought they wiU rather attende the Duke of Parma 
upon the frontiers. 

Out of Germany it is advertised that the Ambassador of the Emperor 
intendes to poison most of the Princes of the Relligion, and that the Duke 
of Saxe was dead therof, and the Duke Casimire ^ verie sicke, and hardely 
escaped, which some of the best of the Germans army doe reporte, but it is 
not very credible. 

The Emperor urgeth earnestly the peace between the Kinge of Spaine and 

' Either John Casimir, Duke of Saxe-Coburg, or John Casimir, Earl Palatine of the Rhine, both of 
whom were brothers-in-law to the electoral Duke of Saxony. 



A. D. 1591.] 133 

the States, with many large offers ; wherof I doubte not but your Lordship is 
better enformed then I can be. 

The discorse of the overthrowe given by Monsr. Dediguiers to the army of 
the Duke of Savoy I send your Lordship herin closed, and have seene the 
13 ensignes and one comett therin mentioned, which is sent to the Kinge. 
So leavinge to trouble your Lordship in hast, &amp;c. 

Your Lordship's to commande, 

Henry Unton. 



LXVII. 

1591, 

6 Nov. " To the Ryght Honorable my very good Lorde, the Lorde 
Highe Treasurer of Englande."' 

Yt may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestic, that the King doth 
yeamestly crave ayde of some of her Majesties shippes to come befor New 
Haven, there to continew duringe the seege of Roan, to hynder the passage of 
the ennemy, whoe otherwise intendeth with all speede to sende by that way 
2,000 Spanniardes to the succor of the towne, which hee sayth might 
altogether hynder his enterpryse. Also, hee urdgeth with as greate instance, 
to obtayne two of her Majesties pynnasses to keape the ryver of Sene, without 
the which hee is not able to commande the ryver ; wherof the Marshall Byron 
hath this day advertisede him, requestinge him yeamestly to wryte to her 
Majestic, and to presse her favor therin, as a matter of greatest importance 
and necessitie for his seege. 

The King shewede me the letters, and requestede me to make a dispatche 
with all speede to her Majestic, which hee sayd hee wold also recommende by 
his spetiall letters ; wheruppon I made much dif&amp;cultie, alleadginge her 
Majesties former and dayly expenses in his ayde, and his continual! requestes 
without respect therof ; and sayd I was sory my service heare did bringe noe 

' From the original in the State Paper OfSce. Nearly similar to the last letter. No. LXVl, from the 
same to the same ; but exhibiting variations worthy of notice. It is not improbable that the two 
letters were sent by two different messengers. 



134 [November, 

manner of satisfaction to her Majesties desyres, but importunacy of new 
requestesj to her insupportable chardge. 

This awnswere of myne movede him very much, wherunto hee replyed that 
yt was not his will so to importune her Majestie, neyther unwillingeness in 
him to content her in whatsoever, but only his meere necessities compelled 
him therunto ; hopinge shortly by the takinge of Roan to geve her Majestie 
better satisfaction, then the which hee desyrede nothinge more, as myght 
appeare by this his jorny thether undertaken cheifely to please her Majestie, 
agaynst the will of most of his Catholiques and the rest of his provinces ; 
wherfor hee yearnestly requestede me to advertise her Majestie accordingely, 
and to use my best furtherance, presuminge the rather of her Majesties favor 
in this, which shold tend to her good. 

To this I awnswerede, I was glad hee had so greate good will to content 
her Majestie, and sory that his necessities shold bee so burthensom to her 
Majestie, as myselfe did know they had beene, and must bee, yf shee were 
pleased to yeald therunto, which I much dowbtede; and therfor requestede 
him to spare her as much as hee might, and to excuse my unwillingeness, 
forcede by duty and knowledge of her Majesties infynite expenses in many 
places ; and so did particularize somwhat therof. Notwithstandinge, I sayd I 
wold advertise accordinge to his desyre, but that my furtherance cold prevayle 
lytle. And I assure your Lordship yf I did not uppon such occasiones take 
this cowrse hee wold dayly more importune her Majestie, conceavinge her 
treasures to bee infynite, and that her peace bringeth plenty and small 
expense. And somtymes hee demandeth whether the cyttie of London wiU 
not lend him 200,000 crownes to pay his Reytters, and dyverse such lyke 
monnye demandes; which causeth me the rather to dealle so playnely with him. 

The King hath sent to the States to furnishe him with the lyke proportion 
of shippinge and pynnasses, which uppon my sayd speeche hee resolvede to 
doe ; intendinge att the fyrst to lay the whole proportion uppon her Majestie. 
But I perceave the necessitie therof and that hee can not bee otherwise sup- 
plyed, els wold I have refusede to advertise of this his request ; leavinge yt to 
her Majestyes pryncely consideration. 

The King causeth his whole army to marche with all diligence to Roan, and 
departeth to morow from thenc to goe towardes Diepe, where hee will bee the 
9 or 10th of this moneth, and from thence immediatly to Roan ; where also 
his army resolveth to bee within 8 dayes. 



A, D. 1591.J 135 

The Reyters and Lanscquenettes have sewerally mutenyede scence my last 
letters, and utterly refusede to marche without present pay ; to whome the 
King did send with all speede dyverse of his cownceU, vrhoe with very greate 
difficultie prevaylede with them, but specially by the meanes of the Prynce 
Danhaulte and dyverse of the cheife leaders and reyghtmasters, whoe 
receaved monny underhande, and so pacyfyede them with promise of payment 
within 14 dayes, which the King hath undertaken, and I feare will hardly bee 
performede, which will then cause theyr revoke without any hope of recon- 
cilinge them. 

The Prynce Danhaulte hath shewede extraordinary affection to the Kinges 
servyce, and hath hetherto concealede the death of the Duke of Saxe from 
them, otherwise noe perswasiones could have stayede them with the King. 

Our stay by the way hath beene the longer, in respect of the marche of the 
army throughe Pyccardye to spoyle the ennemy, and spare his good subjectes ; 
which is very furre abowte to com fi-om Noyon to Roan. 

The last of October the Bushoppes of Beauvois, Mantes, and Angyers came 
to the King to Noyon, sent by the Cardynalls and the rest of the clergye which 
hold for him, to request him to bee instructede in theyr Catholycke fayth, 
accordinge to his promise heartofor made ; as also to sollycite him to make 
peace with the Leaguers, usinge very many perswasiones to move him ther- 
unto. 

To whome the King made awnswere that concerning the fyrst point of 
theyr speeche, hee sayd bee never refusede instruction ; but that this was a 
very unfytt tyme to trowble him then\4th, consideringe his greate affayres 
then in hande. And for the other poinct, hee wishede them to use theyr 
best meanes to worke theyr owne peace, wherunto hee sayd hee wold willingely 
yeald uppon reasonable conditiones ; and that att his comminge to Roan, 
after conference with his cowncell of this theyr negotiation, hee wold geve them 
a more perfect awnswere ; wherwith they rested satisfyede, and the King 
mislykede much this kynd of proceedinge. 

I can assure your Lordship they doe all gennerally yeamestly desyre a 
peace, which the King of Spayne very much feareth ; for the Leaguers doe 
labore yt by all meanes, fearinge the King of Spaynes death; and the 
Royalystes doe as much dowte the lyfe of theyr King, and therfor perswade 
the King to yt. 

From many partes the King is advertisede by letters of good credyte that 



136 [November, 

the Duke of Guyse, beinge att Artell in Champagne, was lately lyke to be 
kylled by a Leaguer, whoe dischardgede his pystoUe, and faylede ; wheruppon 
hee was taken and executede, and confessede to his death that the Duke de 
Mayne had hyrede him therunto. Yf this bee trew, then doth yt coniyrme 
my former advertisements conceminge the Duke of Guyse ; which much I 
doubt as yeat, albeyt the King doth assure yt. 

The Deputies of Parrys are lately retornede from the GeneraU Assembly of 
the Leaguers at Resmes, much discontentede ; so are many of the rest, which 
is much notede. But the particularites therof I can not as yeat learne. 

Yt is advertisede from Rome that the conclave there have expressely com- 
mandede the Pope's army to follow theyr former dyrectiones for France, and 
to joyne with the Leaguers and Duke of Parma with all diligence ; wherof 
many were disbandede befor the receipt of the letters, and departede towardes 
Italy ; so that the nomber is not great that remayne. 

The cumminge of the Duke of Parma is dowtefull ; yeat the King hath 
receavede advertisement that hee intendeth to besceege Chawny, Noyon, and 
dyverse townes in Pyccardy and Champagne, of purpose to divert the Kinges 
seege, which hee, notwithstandinge, resolveth to continew ; and yf hee attempt 
his townes, to make a cavalcado with 3,000 horse towardes the Duke of 
Parma, and so to retome to the seege. 

The army of the Duke de Mayne is at Guyse, makinge show to marche 
after the King ; but yt is thought they will rather attende the Duke of Parma 
cumminge uppon the frontyers. 

Out of Germany yt is advertisede that the ambassadour of the Emperor 
intendede to poyson most of the Prynces of the Religion there, and that the 
Duke of Saxe did dye therof, and the Duke Casimyre hardly escapede, beinge 
very sycke and geven over by the phisitianes, yeat is hee now well recoverede. 
This I receavede from certayne noblemen of Germany and of the Army heare ; 
which is not credyble. 

The Emperor doth very much urdge the peace betweene the King of 
Spayne and his subjectes of the Lowe Countryes, offeringe them lardge 
conditiones to ammuze them, and dealeth with the prynces of Germany to bee 
mediators therin ; wherof I know your Lordship is better informed then I am, 
or can bee. 

I sende your Lordship hear inclosede the discowrse of the overthrow geven 
to the Duke of Savoy his army ; and have seene the 15 ensignes and cornett 



A. D. 1591.J 137 

taken by him and sent to the King, which hath very much discouragede the 
Italyans, whoe tremble att the name of Dediguieres and are loth to sende any 
more supplyes, neyther can they gett any to come. Olivario, the Gennerall 
of the last army mentioned in the discowrse, is sayd to bee commytted to 
pryson by the Ducchesse of Savoye and some others. 

The King calleth uppon my dispatche, and I beeceeche your Lordship to 
excuse this my hasty scrybUnge, and so humbly take my leave. 

From the campe att Hardyvillier, in Pyccardy, within 20 leagues of Roan, 
this 6th of November, 1591. 

Your Lordship's to commande, 

Henry Unton. 

Simone Mortara, an ItaUan, came unto me after the fynyshinge of my 
letters, desyringe me to present him to the King ; and informinge me that hee 
was imployed in Her Majesties service, and had matter of great importance for 
them both ; some part wherof hee imparted to me. I fynd more wordes then 
substance in him by that hee uttered to me, and the most part befor adver- 
tisede ; hee desyred to bee convayed into England, wherin I have done my 
best to satisfye him. 



LXVIIL 



1591, 

6th Nov. « To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Harvey." 

Sir, I hope you will pardon my last and first fault in not writinge by Sir 
Roger Williams ; whos hast and my wante of leisure was such as I had not 
tyme to write sixe lines by him ; neather can I write much more nowe ; wher- 
fore I pray you excuse my former not writinge to litteU purpose, beinge 
forced by the sudden departure of this messenger to end my letter before I 
begine it. 

My service here I desire may be acceptable to her Majestie, whos only 

T 



138 [November, 

favor is able to geive Hefe to my actions and comforte to my soule ; and I 
protest her late disfavor hath bredd in my mynde all mannor of greefes and 
diseontentements, which I neede not ; wantinge no misseries before in this 
misserable countrie. My fault was that I consented with Sir Thomas Leighton 
and Mr. Killegrewe, allowinge my Lord Generalls journey to Gournay ; 
wherof the successe was good ; but this shalbe a warninge to me, for I will 
never more advise, and only advertise accordinge to my duty, without good 
warrant from her Majestic. 

If your Honors favor male make intercession for me, you shall binde me ; 
wherefore I beseech you be pleased so much to respect me, and you shall 
ever hereafter have power to comande me. 

I am sorry the Kinges requests are so burthensome to her Majestie, as I 
conceave they must needs be ; if her Majestie be pleased to yeald therunto. 
Wherin my plaine dealinge with the Kinge hath some tymes given offence ; 
so that my service is unpleasinge to him, and as yet not profitable to her 
Majestie, also not very pleasinge to my selfe. I may saie with him, profecto 
hie animus non est meus, utinam sit aliorum. Of my advertisements I will 
spare to write to your Honor, referinge you to my letters to my Lord your 
father, wherin I have omitted none worthy the writinge, and will not force 
your beleefe of them, but accordinge to your discretion, which can sufiiciently 
deserne of what nature they are. 

The Kinge hasteneth my messenger, and I have no more leisure then to 
close upp my letters ; wherfore I will end your Honors trouble of my ragged 
hand. And so humbly take my leave. 

From the campe at the village of Hardi Villyer, 16 ^ November 1591. 

Your honor to comande. 

Hen. Unton. 

' So in the Bodleian manuscript, but obviously an error for the 6th of November. 



A. D. 1591.] 139 



LXIX. 

1591, 

7 Nov. " To the Lord Treasurer ; by Harvey." ' 

My very good Lord. Scence the closinge upp of my letters, the King sent 
Monsieur Revol his Secretary, to request me to move her Majestie for 2,000 
Pykes, wherof his Lansequenettes shold have very greate neede. My awn- 
swere was that in my opinion her Majestie cold not spare so many, and ther- 
for thought yt in vayne to wryte for them ; notwithstandinge hee wold have 
me to advertise her Majestie hearof ; which I leave to her consideration and 
pleasure. 

I movede the King to geve accesse to the Italyan mentionede in my former 
letters,^ which hee yearnestly cravede of me. But the King refused to speake 
with him, holdinge him to bee a suspitious parson ; wherof hee willed me also 
to geve knowledge to her Majestie ; yeat hee ofireth the King the imploy- 
ment of a mynister of Spayne for his servyce, and sayth hee hath abowte him 
the cheife cyphere of the King of Spaynes for that purpose. Hee promiseth to 
discover matters of very greate importance to her Majestie conceminge her 
safety and estate, but desyrede me to wryte nothinge therof in particuler to 
your Lordship ; yeat I thought yt necessary to bee made knowen to your 
Lordship ; and so leave him to your better examination. 

The King stayeth all day to morowe att this villadge, to accomodate matters 
betwixte him and the Duke de Nevers, whoe is ver)- frowarde and will not 
follow the Kinges directiones, but showeth publyke discontentment. Hee came 
out of Champagne from his government, and hath followed the army to this 
towne without the Kinges knowledge, but hee meaneth to force him to retorne. 
I feare hee will prove a badd subject. 

The King resolveth now to bee att Roan the 10th of this moneth, and hath 
chandgede his former resolution to goe fyrst to Diepe ; the rather to loose 
noe tyme, as hee sayth. So in all hast, I humbly take my leave. 

' From the original letter in the State Paper Office. A copy is also contained in the Bodleian MS. 
' Namely, in the Postscript to No. LXVII. 



140 [November, 

From Crevecoeur, this 7th of November, 1591. 

Your Lordships to commande, 

Henry Unton. 

Postscript. Scence the wrytinge of this, advertisement is come to the 
King that on Fryday last the President Brisson, Tardif and L'Archier, cown- 
sellors of the cowrt of Parlament att Parrys, were there causede to bee hanged 
by the people, amongest whome there is also a very greate mutenye. The sayd 
Presydent Brisson was hee that gave the sentence of condemnation agaynst 
the Kinge deceassede. 



LXX. 

1591, 

9 Nov. " From her Majestie ; receaved by Sir Roger Williams, 

the 15th," 
ELIZABETH R. 

Trustie and welbeloved, we greete you well. We have understood by your 
letters the substance of your negotiation, with your excuse of goinge to the 
Kinge. And wheare you seame to appeale to your former instructions for 
repaire unto him after your arryvall, it was not our purpose that you should 
have donne it but with regarde of tyme and place, with all due circumstances, 
consideringe that since your arryvall you have understoode bothe howe ill we 
have ben dealte with, and howe farre he had transported him selfe into the 
moste remote partes of France unfitt for your accesse, when we had so good 
cause, as your selfe knoweth, to look for him elswher ; which if he had donne, 
our meaninge then was that you should have repaired to him accordinge to 
our instructions. But for as much as by your laste writinge we doe perceive 
bothe your faithe and viUigence, your good devotion to serve us, and the 
obedient conformitie of your minde in all thinges to your power and under- 
standinge to foUowe our comandements, we doe passe over the former error, 
seingewefinde the grownde by mistakinge; and doe by theise our letters 



A. D. 1591.] 141 

thancke you for your care and good regarde you have in all your carriage of 
your selfe, both to our honor and agreeable to the place you presente there. 

You shall hereby understand that uppon earneste intercession made by 
the French Kinge, lainge open the extremitie of his estate and the likelihood 
of the ruyne of this action, wherin we have expended bothe the lifes of our 
people and good portions of our treasures, with plaine and evident declaration 
of the certeintie of his Allmane army like to breake \vithout the ayde and 
countenance of us, and the continewance of our army ; we have, rather then 
the whole cause should perishe, resolved to helpe him, thoughe for his owne 
particular he hathe geiven small cause to us to doe any thinge for him ; seinge 
by his owne errors he hath moste prejudiced him selfe in this matter of greate 
consequence. And therfore have we yealded to his demands of makinge upp 
the nombers there, beinge one thousand, so manie more to be drawen oute of 
our bandes in the Lowe Countreyes, well trayned old souldiers, to be valewed 
above twoe thowsande of any newe undisciplined companies; addinge unto them 
out of England four hundred pyoners and fiftie myners, to be paied by us for 
a moneth ; uppon this condition, that if we maie not heare from him assurance 
of contentation of the Almaigne army, cheifly brought in by us and trustinge 
uppon our wourde, which we may not forgett to the Princes of Germanic, for 
all our good usage of them accordinge to their pacts and covenantes, that 
then we meane not to contynue anie longer our charges, because him selfe 
confesseth all will serve him, if they breake, to littell purpose, or none at all. 

And nowe to the entent that the Prince of Anhalte maie make knowen unto 

them what greate cure we have of them and their preservations, we have 

written unto him an other seconde ' letter, to exorte him and the reste to 

persever to the ende, which crownes all actions ; with which our pleasure is 

that you shall, havinge caused some place of meetinge with the saied Prince, 

deale with him accordinge to the honor of the letter, enlarginge it accordinge 

to your discreation. And because you maie the better judge of anie cora- 

plaintes they may use of the Kinge, we have sent you here some principal! 

articles of the contract, wherin you shall enterpose your best endeavors to the 

satisfaction of them, and to exorte them to the consumation of this wourke so 

noblv begune by them, and like to prove to the good of the generall cause, 

if with patience and christian resolution they hould out to the end, which 

cannott be longe, nor will not be but to their generall satisfaction in honor, 

comoditie and safetie. 

' See No. LXXII. 



142 [November, 

Geven at our manner of Rychmond, the 9th of November, 1591. 

Postcripte, added by Sir Robert Cecyll. 

Since her Majestie signed this letter, I am commanded to let you knowe 
that in respecte of the place you holde, shee will not have you goe your seHe 
to the Prince, but that uppon the retourne of Sir Roger Williams, after he 
hathe delivered her Majesties letter and brought you their answeare, you shall 
certefie us, and accordinge to your discretion by some gentleman of yours lett 
them knowe that her Majestie hath appointed you at all tymes to be an inter- 
cessor between the Kinge and them, uppon anie just occasion ; comendinge all 
this to be used as you finde convenient in your owne discreation. 

To our trustie and welbeloved Sir Henry 
Unton, our Ambassador resident with our 
good brother the French Kinge. 



LXXI. 

1591, 

9 Nov. " From Sir Robert Cecyll ; receaved the 15th, 

by Sir Roger Williams." 

Sir, I have not written to you this fyve weekes because I looked stiU to 
heare where you were, or what you did ; which never any body hearde from 
your first departure from Gournay towardes the Kinge, till nowe by your 
letters to the Queene and my Lord from Noyon ; wherin, by the waie, Sir, 
you use the newe stile, which is not to be donne by you that followe our 
reckoninge. Do but see by this whether I thinke not myselfe a wise man or 
no ; take it well, for good is the grownde, I assure you. 

I redd bothe your letters to the Queene, beinge longe and to good purpose; 
the manner of your appologie beinge such as you neede not feare the Tower 
for your punishement. By the occasion wherof her Majestie sayeinge still it 
was yett some error in you to go so iurr, as by her owne ' letter in which my 
hande appeares, I answeared her plainely, that if you had never gonne, but 

» See No. LXX. 



A. D. 1591.] 143 

that we had beleived poore Grimstons writinges, we should have ben colted ^ 
still with ther cunninge promises, which by your letter appeared you were to 
wise to doe ; for by your direct writinge now shee sawe what to trust to. She 
confessed it, and saied Grimston was a foole, and should come home. She is 
moste gratiouslie perswaded of your sufficiency, faith, and viUigence ; you see 
it confessed by her Majestie's owne signature. I tolde her that in your ridinge 
to the Kinge, you had fifty horse of your owne. The Queen speakes of it, 
and tells every boddy. Shee troweth she hathe sente noe foole nor no beggar; 
with much more in your commendations. 

This gentleman. Sir Roger Williams, hath sattisfyed the Queene verie well, 
and hath done the cause good by plaine deallinge. 

My lord of Essex I thincke will come home, but to retourne. Hee is 

highelie in the Queenes favor. If I could doe more or tell you more, you 

should comand it. My hande, I muste confesse, is verie lame at this houre ; 

I pray you pardon my scribles. I send you the cheife pointes of the 

contracte of the Prince Anhalt with the Kinge, that you male see some light ; 

when they complaine with out cause, you muste not incorage them to much to 

complaine, but even accordinge to your judgment to temporise with them, for 

that is the Queenes meaninge. She saieth she dare truste you with it 

althoughe " Parole non pagano ;" you know what. 

From the Corte, the 9th of November, 1591. 

Your assured friende, 

My lord Chancellor is not well, but Robert Cecyll. 

he contynewes to me a moste noble 
and constant freind ; and in this action 
am I wittnes howe much my lord of 
Essex owes him. 



LXXII. 
1591, 

!* Nov. "' Coppie of her Majesties seconde letter to the 

Prince of Anhalt." 

Mon cousin. Combien quU ny a pas longe temps que nous vous avons 

' To colt, to deceive ; see Nares's Glossary 



144 [November, 

escript, et que nous ayons donne ordere nostre Ambassadeur pres le Roy 
nostre bon frere le Roy treschrestien de vous faire tenir noz lettres, par 
lesquelles nous vous recomande, come aussy a tout la noblesse et coUonells 
dicelle armee, lestat du Roy que lo'n attend debvoir estre secouru par votre 
valleur et armes Allemandez. Sy est ce que vous ramentevoir combien il est 
necessarie que vous persisties et contynues votre armee et vos actionis pour 
un accomplishement finall des affaires que le Roy a presentement a la main ; 
lesquelles estantes heureusement paracheves, le mettront paisible et asseure en 
son estat, et seront cause de rompre les violentis desseings de lennemy com- 
mun. Voyla pour quoy nous vous prions tres afecteusemente, nostre bon Cou- 
sin, de vouloir prendre I'affaire a cueur, come chose laquelle estant vivement 
poursuivie a ce coup pour quelques mois, pourchassera grande partie attribuer 
la victorie que nous esperons Dieu donnera au Roy a la confusion de lennemy 
comun ; ce que nous desirons que veuilles comuniquer de nostre part a 
toute la noblesse de votre compagnie, et a touts les collonells et capitaines 
de votre armie ; lesquelles nous prions aussy tresinstament et pour la cause de 
Dieu, et pour I'honieur de la nation Allemande, que mettantz arriere toutes 
difficultes, ils veuillent totallement adonner eux et leurs forces a ce que le Roy 
soit paisiblement estably en son royaulme, contre les rebelles et traistres ; 
estant la seule fin pour laquelle ceste armee a este a ceste fois dressee par 
les Princes Protestants du St. Empire ; et princepaliment par le zele de feu 
nostre trescher Cousin I'Electeur de Saxe, pour la haulte memorie duquel 
(son ame estant a ceste heure entre les mains de nostre bon Dieu,) nous ne 
faisons doubte que vos et toute la noblesse qui I'avez tant honore en sa vie, 
au vous emploiez de toutes voz forces a compler ce que somes asseures vous 
et eulx eussies faict en son Vivant. E pour la part du Roy, il fault que nous 
vous dirons quil nous asseure par ses lettres expresses quil n'ometra a rien des 
moiens qui luy seront possibles pour satisfaire et contenter votre armee 
en toutes les conditions cy devant promises ; ce sil ne faisoit veu que nostre 
opinion est que nostre soUicitation et reputation ont este la principalle cause 
de vous faire acheminer en France pour son secours a present, nous come Prince 
qui avons vostre honneur tres recomande, et qui tant desirons d'encontynuer 
la reputation avec toutes les Preinces Protestants de Lempire et touts leurs 
subjectes, ferons parroistre au monnde que si le Roy ne fera tout ce qui sera 
en sa puissance pour tenir ses promesses en votre endroict, nous nous de- 
porterons de plus nous soucier, ny de son estat ny de ses affaires, ce que nous 



A. D. 1591,] 145 

luy avons faict scavoir par noz lettres que luy avons expressement escriptes 
a cest effect. Et a tant, mon Cousin, nous recomandons tres affectionement a 
voz bonnes graces ; priant Dieu vous tenir tousjovires. Le 9". de Novembre, 
1591. 

Votre tres affectionee Cousine, 

A mon Cousin, Le Prince D'Anhalt, ELIZABETH R. 

Generall de I'armee d'Allemaigne a 
present en France. 



LXXin. 



1591, 

11 Nov. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 15th of this 
moneth, by Sir Roger Williams, att Deepe." 

My lord Ambassador. I knowe not whether you have receaved certain e 
letters, wherin mention was made of her Majesties letters * written to the Prince 
of Anhalt uppon the reportes brought heither of the deathe of the Duke of 
Saxe, which letters you were appointed to presente unto him, and he was 
required to give you credit in explayninge her Majesties greate desire to have 
him continewe with the Almaigne armye in the service of the Kinge, not- 
withstandinge the deathe of the saied Duke. Butt findinge by mishapp the 
letter signed by her Majestie not sent awaye, as was intended, I doe nowe 
sende it unto you, and the coppy therof also ; prayinge you to informe the 
Kinge therof, and to offer him to sollicitt the saied Prince and his coUonells, in 
her Majesties name, to continewe the service, especially nowe intended against 
Roan, as the moste speitiall service that can be desired for the Kinge. 

You are also to understand that her Majestie hath written a seconde letter 
to the saied Prince, ^ wherein some mention in the beginninge is made of this 
which I nowe sende you ; which seconde letter is carried from hence by Sir 
Roger Williams ; and therfore if you can finde comoditie to present this I 

&gt; See No. LXI. ' See No. LXXII. 



146 [November, 

nowe sende you before that be presented, it shall supplie this default; or 
otherwise, I praie you in your wisdome to make some excuse by allegation of 
the slownes of the messengers. And so makinge haste to dispatch this letter 
unto you, I forbeare to write of any other thinge. 

From my howse, (where I have ben sicke these 13 daies,) this 11th of 
November, 1591. 

Your Lordship's assured loving freind, 

I praye you, advertise of the receipte William Bubghley. 

of this letter. 

I am moste sorrie that I cannott write 
better of my lord Chancellors health, who 
is tormented with excoriatio vesica. ^ 

To the righte honorable my verie 
good freinde, Sir Henery Unton, Knight, 
her Majesties Ambassador resident in 
Fraunce. 



LXXIV. 



1591, 

11 Nov. " To the Lord Threasurer ; from Neuffchastell.''^ 

It may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestie that as the Kinge was 
takinge his Journey the 9th of this moneth from GrandviUer to goe towards 
Roan, (where he resolved to be the nexte day foUowinge,) he receaved adver- 
tisement that Monsr. D'Hummieres had surprised the towne of Rue in Pic- 
cardie, and that the souldiers of the garrison were retyred into the cyttadell, 
and would not yeald, in hope of succor from the enemy. Wheruppon the 
Kinge with 3,000 horse hastened with all speed towards the towne, fearinge 

' In the MS. excoriation recice. 

' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



A, D, 1591.J 147 

the repxJse of his men ; but before his cominge thither the cittadell was also 
forced by batterie to yeald, and the souldiers by composition to departe with 
their rapiers only, leavinge ther armes behinde them ; so the Kinge repaired 
in all dihgence hither and will not faile to be the 13th at Roan. 

The towne of Rue was surprised the 7th, and the cittadell the 8th, without 
losse of anie man of quallitie of the Kings parte ; and the lieutenant of the 
towne was very sore hurte, and diverse of his souldiers slayne before they 
would yeald. The governor was departed to Abbyville with 100 horse, 
fearinge least the Kinge would enterprize some what uppon that towne ; by 
whose absence the surprize was the more facyle, for he lefte only 60 souldiers 
to gard tlie towne. 

The complotter of the saied enterprise was on Monsr. De Beausampre, who 
hath the government of the towne bestowed on him. It is of verie greate 
importance to the Kinge in respecte it is so neare Abbeville, and Monstreul, 
which cannot nowe holde out, for they \vilbe daylie impeached. I knowe your 
Lordship remembreth that Rue was specially fortefyed heretofore, when 
our Englishe had BuUen, the rather to bridell us ther ; and in respecte of the 
scituation and fortification it is not prennable. The Kinge dothe nowe 
esteeme it as a place of greate consequense, and bathe this morninge, used 
publicke prayers for his good successe therein. ^ 

The enemy had assembled 400 horse and some foote to succor the cittadell, 
and doe remaine in the feilds, expectinge the retoume of the Kinge's forces 
from thence, but did not dare to attempte any thinge uppon the Kinge ^ and 
his owne companie who loadged within a league of them, and was inferrior in 
noumber. Herof I thought necessarie to advertisse your Lordship, and by 
you, her Majestic, in respecte of the Kings staye, and of his happie 
successe ; wherof him selfe hath also written to her Majestic, whose letter I 
sende here inclosed. 

The Reyters remaine as yet at Grandviller, and do march towards Gama- 
ches, there to contynue duringe the seege for the comoditie of forrage for their 
horses ; and the Lansquenetts marche towards Roan, which the Kinge hathe 
brought to passe with greate difficultie, for they resolved, since my laste 
letters, not to march before they had their pave, which is appointed the 25th 

' In the original, the passage stands thus, "and for this his good success causede solemne publyke 
rayersto bee made both by his ministers and the catholickes." 
•i "the Kinge, whoe lodgede att Oysemonde, within 2 leagues of them," [orig.] 



148 [November, 

of this moneth. The coppy of the Kinges late newes of Paris I send your 
Lordship herinclosed ; wherof your lordship male perceive the particulary- 

ties. 1 

To morrowe the Kinge goeth within three leagues of Roan, and I intend to 
be at Deepe to refresse myself, beinge wearied with the King's toylsome 
journeyes; as also to furnishe my selfe with money; where the Kinge also 
resolveth to be within foure dales, and so to retourne with him to the campe. 

Soe havinge nothinge ells wourthie your Lordship's advertisement, I moste 
humbly take my leave. 

From Neufchastell, the 13th « of November, 1591. » 

Your Lordship humbly to command, 

Henry Unton. 



LXXV. 

1591, 

19 Nov. " To the Lord Threasurer; by Sir Thomas Leighton, 
who departed also with the Lord Generall." * 

My verie good Lord, My late cominge to the campe this nighte, and my 
shorte warninge of the Lord Generalls departure, who departed earely in the 
morninge, will not suffer me to write as I would and ought to doe to your 
Lordship ; wherfore I presume uppon this occasion your Lordship will par- 
don my brevitie and hastie scribles. 

The two letters of her Majestie directed to the Prince Anhalt, with a coppie 

' The last sentence in this paragraph is not in the original letter. 

2 The original letter is dated 1 1 November. 

3 To the original is appended this postscript. " The Kinge hathe made 3 gentlemen knyghtes that have 
accompanyed me this jorny ; Sir Chr. Lytcott, Sir Tho. Clialoner, and Sir Deurax Poole, son and heyr 
to Sir Henry Poole ; which he sayd hee would doe to showe his love to me, and for want of profytt to 
bestowe honore. Yt was his pleasure so to have ytt, which neyther I nor they could well refuse ; and 
soe 1 once more humbly take my leave." 

" The original letter is contained in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1591.] 149 

of the firste of them, I have receaved ; as also your letter of the 1 1 th of this 
monethe to my selfe ; ' and will accordinglie performe your Lordships dirrec- 
tions therin, bothe for the delivery of the same letters and of such speache 
as by her Majestic and yours I am required. And had I not expected the 
Kings cominge to Deepe, accordinge to his appointement, my service therin 
should not have ben one day differed. Notwithstandinge, your Lordship 
shalbe verie shortelie advertised therof; for I will nowe slacke no oppor- 
tunity. 

I shall not neede to advertise your Lordship of the takinge of the towne of 
St. Vallery, but not the castell as yett, by Monsr. de Nevers ; neither of the 
cominge of the Duke of Parma with 1 0,000 foote and sixe regiments of Lans- 
quenetts, and 3,000 horse, to inhabite, as it is saied, here, and to contj'nue 
warres againste the Kinge ; who without her Majesties better assistance cannott 
encounter him, nor longe dwell in his owne kingdome. These thinges and all 
other matters of wourth my Lord GeneraU can sufficiently reporte to your 
Lordship, as also the poore and misserable estate of the Kinge; wherfor I 
will spare your Lordship trouble herein ; and leave all to his Lordship, and 
your honorable consideration. Only I will advertise your Lordship of the 
wante of paie of the German armye, which should have ben the 25th of this 
moneth, stilo novo, and of their discontentment for the same ; all which is as 
yett pasified with hope of Monsr. du Plessis his present cominge with money, 
which is dayly expected, and cannot be longe, for he was come to Tours, 
Hereof I thought good to advertise your Lordship. 

The comforte I lately receaved by her Majesties moste gratious letters is 
very greate, and bathe revyved me as it were from deathe to life ; for the 
which I doe humbly thancke your Lordship and my honorable freind Sir 
Robert Cecyll, whose favors have and doe greately upholde me in her Ma- 
jesties good grace ; for the which I can but offer my poore service ; and will 
accordingUe honor your Lordship and him duringe lief. And so in haste I 
humblie take my leave. 

From the campe before Roan, the 19th of November, 15!n. 

Your Lordships ever to comande, 

This honorable gentleman Sir Thomas Henry Unton. 

Leighton dothe greately honor your 

&gt; See No. LXXII. 



150 [November,' 



Lordship, and hathe donne very greate 
good to her Majesties service, and can 
reporte all things sufficientlie. 



LXXVI. 



1591, 

19 Nov. " To her Majestie ; by the Lord Generall." 

Your Highnes moste gratious letters directed to me, and sent by Sir Roger 
Williams, I have receaved to my singular greate comforte ; acknowledginge 
your Majesties princely favor and especiall goodnes, as the only true almynacke 
of my never endinge good, and with all humillitie yealdinge my due thanck- 
fulnes for the same. 

Conceminge your Majesties pleasure signified by your saied letters, I will 
with all dutie and sinceritie perfourme bothe towardes the Kinge, as also the 
Prince Anhalt, what your Majestie requireth, and accordinge to your grave and 
princelie dirrections. And am sorry I cannott as yett advertise your Majestie 
of my service therin ; the occasion wherof hathe ben my absence from the 
Kinge these foure daies, and since the receipte of your Majesties letters, ex- 
pectinge his dailie cominge to Deepe, whether I repaired only to refreshe my 
selfe after my longe journey, and am nowe expreslie retourned to the campe 
to foUowe your service, havinge verie shortely to advertise your Highnes of 
my audience with the Kinge ; and my conference with the prince Danhalt. 

The dale appointed by the Kinge for the paiement of the German armye 
was the 25th of this monethe, after the newe style ; which beinge expired, 
and they not satisfyed accordingly, hathe bread some discontentement amonge 
them. Notwithstandinge, they are yett well satisfyed with the Kinge's pro- 
mises, who hath assured them of paie at the cominge of Monsr. Du Plessis, 
who is daiely expected to bringe money with him. 

It is advertised crediblie that the Duke of Parma is ready to enter Fraunce, 
and there to continewe, to make his warres ; which bringeth a greate terror to 



A. D. 1591.J 151 

the Kinge, and the French of his parte ; whose estate, I proteste to your Ma- 
jestie, is moste lamentable, and without your Majestie, not able longe to sub- 
siste. Wherof your Majestie hathe been lately advertised, and hathe ben 
pleased most gratiously to consider, and not without greate cause ; and therfore 
I shall not neede further to move your Majesties regarde of him and his mis- 
series ; neither can I add any thinge to your wisdome and consideration of 
the importaunce of this nowe cominge of the Duke of Parma, and of his in- 
tended continuance in Fraunce. For I know your Majestie dothe provident- 
lie foresee all things, and will leave nothinge inconsidered. 

The Kinge was verie unwillinge to suffer my Lord Generall to departe, but 
he moste wiUinge to departe and to retourne ; by whome your Majestie shalbe 
sufficiently enformed of all things of wourth, and his haste is verie greate, so 
that I cannott nor shall neede to inlarge my advertisements. Wherfore I 
leave further to encrease your Majesties trouble ; but never leave duelie to 
praie for your continuall happines and all manner of prosperitie. And so I 
moste humbly take my leave. 

From the campe before Roan, the 19th of November, 1591. 

Your Majesties moste obedient 

servant and subjecte, 

Henry Unton. 



LXXVII. 

1591, 

19th Nov. " To the Lord Chancellor ; by Sir Thomas Leighton." 

My moste honorable good Lord. I am in a manner forced to end before 
I begine, in respecte of the hast of my Lord Generall, and my shorte warn- 
inge to write to her Majestie, my Lord Threasurer, and your Lordship ; for I 
came late this nighte to the campe, and his Lordship departeth earlie the 
nexte mominge; wherfore I humbly crave pardon of your Lordship if I 
write not as I should doe. 



152 [November, 

I have not nowe other newes to advertise your Lordship then of the 
cominge of the Duke of Parma into Fraunce, who is thought by this tyme to 
be entred with 10,000 of his owne foote and with sixe regiments of Lansque- 
netts, and 2,000 Reyters ; besides as manie more of his owne. This bringeth 
a terror to the Kinge and his good subjectes ; and it is advertised that the 
Duke of Parma intendethe to contynue in France, to make warres against the 
Kinge, and to abandon the Lowe Countreies, 

Your Lordship shalbe more particularly advertised by the cominge of the 
Lord Generall, whose presence there in my poore opinion will doe more good 
in the cause, and whose army is not above 400 stronge men, which is lament- 
able. I referr all to his Lordships better reporte, and so will spare therin 
your Lordships trouble. 

I am not a Uttell perplexed to heare of your Lordships wante of healthe, 
which bringeth wantes to many, and to me moste, whose whole and only 
comforte dependeth on your Lordships favor and goodnes, and who, I pro- 
teste, dothe not desier to live after your Lordship. God I hope will lenghten 
your Lordships dales longe for the good of all England, and of your poore 
followers and servants, amonge the which I will ever accompte my selfe one. 
I humblie beseech your Lordship to give Mr. Briskett leave to advertise me 
of your health ; for the newes of your Lordships late sicknes hathe more 
amazed me and killed my minde then any worldely thinge ; and I cannott 
but sufier extraordinarilie with many in this case. 

Her Majestic hathe ben pleased by Mr. Roger Williams to write me a 
moste gratious letter, and hath reconcyled me to her favor ; for the which I 
doe onely acknowledge myself bound to your Lordship, and will laie this upp 
with the reste of your honorable favors. 

This honorable gentleman Sir Thomas Leighton dothe greately honor your 
Lordship, and for your sake hathe done me many favors. He is a moste 
worthie gentleman, and hathe donne her Majestic greate service here and 
tempered matters when ells they would have gone amisse. I have greate 
comforte of his service and discretion, and doe humbUe recomende him to 
your Lordships good favor, which he greately desirethe ; as also Sir Edmund 
Yorke, who speaketh all honor of your Lordship, and acknowledge him selfe 
much bounde to your, Lordship. 

So leavinge to trouble your Lordship, but never to honor and praie for your 
Lordship, I humbly take my leave. 



A. D. 1591. 153 

The Campe, this 19th of November, 1591. 

Your Lordships onley bound, 

Sir John Wingfeild is an humble sutor Henry Unton. 

to your Lordships favor to helpe him to 
Sir Roberte, and [ am desired in his be- 
halfe to recomend him to your Lordship. 



LXXVIIL 
1591, 

19 Nov. " From Sir Robert Cecyll ; receaved the firste of 

December, 1591." 

Sir, this bearrer is sente for some purpose into Roan, which you shall 
knowe by him. He feareth the beeinge taken by some of the Kinges soul- 
diers, and therfore dothe desire to have by your meanes a pasporte for his 
safetie ; the manner wherof he dothe desire male be accordinge to his owne 
minde, which he will enforme you of. If it please you to procure it, you shall 
I thincke finde him furnished with wytt enoughe for that he is used in, by 
dyrections from hence. And so for this tyme I leave you to Gods pro- 
tection. 

From the Corte, the I6th ' of November, 1591. 

Your lovinge freinde 

at commandement, 

Robert Cecyll. 



LXXIX. 
1591, 

19 Nov. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Sir Thomas Leighton." 

Sir, thoughe my haste be verie greate, yett my haste muste not leave hum- 
blie to acknowledge your favors, which are many ; and to yealde such poore 

' So dated in the copy, but ascribed to the 19 in the Title. 
X 



154 [November, 

thanckfulnes as is due by mee to your Honor. I confesse I am not a littell 
proude of her Majestie's gratious favor, signified by her letter written with 
your hande,! and onely obteyned by your honorable selfe ; but I am not so 
proud as to forgett the author therof, nor offer my poore fortune and true 
service in requitall, with which offer I humbly beseech you to contente your 
selfe untill my fortune may yealde a better requitall. I did owe your Honor 
much before my cominge into France, but nowe I owe you moste, and have 
founde the effectes of your favor ; for the which I can paie you onely with 
paper and wourdes. I begg the contynuance therof from you, wherof I per- 
ceive I have neede, and am sorry so much to be troublesome to your Lordship. 

I came but this nighte to the campe from Deepe, and my Lord Generall 
gave me warninge imediately of his departure earely in the morninge, so that 
I was forced in poste to write to her Majestic, my Lord Threasurer, and my 
Lord Chancellor ; which postinge letters I hope they and you will pardon. 

By my nexte you shall have amends, and by this I confesse my wante of leisure 
and ragged scribbles, which I hope your Honor will pardon, and not love me 
by the length of my letters. My hope is greate that your Honors sufficiente, 
which her Majestie findeth and the world knoweth will make you my debter: 
wherof I longe to heare moste of any worldlie thinge, and more for your sake, 
than any seconde respectes. I assure my Lord Chancellor of your Honors 
constancy to him, and of your daylie acknowledginge of his favors, and by the 
measure of your love to me he judgeth what yours wilbe to him ; which by 
my letters I doe often intemate, and will doe further as your Honor shall 
directe me. 

I beseeche youlett my Lord Generall knowe what service I have donne him, 
and what hurte therby to my selfe. Also I humblie desire you to let this 
gentleman, Sir Thomas Leighton, knowe that I have often written to your 
Honor and others honorablie of him ; for he hathe used me verie kindely. 
So in haste with offer of my beste service, I humbhe take my leave. 

From the Campe before Roan, the 19th of November, 1591. 

Yours to command, 
I humblie thancke you for your honor- Henry Unton. 

able remembrance of my errors, which I 
beseech you to continew. 

' See No. LXX. 



A. D. 1591.J 155 



LXXX. 

1591, 

25 Nov. " To her Majestie ; by my cossine Lewcknor." 

It male please your Highnes. Yesterday, beinge the 22ndi of this monethe, 
I had audience of the Kinge, to whom I declared your Majesties greate good- 
nes and gratious favors in yealdinge to most of his demands for men and 
money for a moneth longer, wher unto your Majestie was the rather moved to 
condiscend uppon the consideration of the extremetie of his estate, and the 
likelyhood of the breakinge of his Almaigne armye, and soe of the ruine of this 
action ; — but uppon this condition, that if that army, brought in by your 
Majesties favor and charge, did not receave due contentement and satisfaction 
at his hands, wherof you were bounde in honor to have care, that you would 
no longer continewe your expenses here, in respecte he himselfe confesseth by 
his oune letters to your Majestie, all wiU then serve him to Uttell purpose or 
none at all. Also 1 did signifie to him howe gratiously your Majestie had 
written to the Prince Anhalt, exortinge him therby to continewe his beste 
forwardnes for the service of him and his countrey ; as also commanded me to 
use, in your Majesties name, all fitt perswasions to that effecte. 

To this the Kinge answeared with aU due ceremonies and wourdes of thanck- 
fulnes, acknowledgeinge your Majesties favor in the highest degree ; of whom 
he saied he did in a manner hould all he hadd, and was sorry his amitie was 
so burthensome and chargeable to your Majestie, to whom he owed more 
then to aU the world besides, and so required me to expresse him to your Ma- 
jestie, wherof he hath partly written to your Majestie by my Lord General! 
and nowe by this bearrer. 

Concerninge the condition of contentinge the Almaigne army, he willed me 
to assure you that he would not faUe their to preserve bothe your honor and 
his owne, as much as he was able ; expectinge daihe mony from Monsr. De 
Plessis to paie them their seconde monethes due ; and that shortely after he 
would provide money for their third monthes paie, bothe beinge already ex- 
pired ; but since he hathe plainely confessed, uppon conference with Monsr. 

' So in the Bodleian MS., but we should read the 24th. 



156 [November, 

Do, that he is no waie able to performe the thirde monethes paie, and verie 
hardly the seconde ; which doth greately afflicte his mynde, fearinge their 
mutynie ; and therfore desired me to use my beste meanes to procure the 
Prince Anhalte to be contented with the seconde monethes paie, which 
amounteth to 116,000 crownes, and to forbeare the reste for a tyme. Uppon 
this his answeare I did take holde, tellinge him I was sorry to advertise your 
Majestic hereof, which would highlie discontente you, and ther uppon with- 
drawe your former intended aide ; wherfore I wished him herein to geive your 
Majestic better cause of contentement, whose honor was so greately ingaged ; 
and used such other perswasions as might moste presse him to satisfie them, 
which he promiseth to performe if he may have convenient tyme ; and hath 
this day oifered the Prince to paie him a greate parte in wynes at a reasonable 
rate from Mantes, and the reste in money ; wher unto the Collonells do some 
whatt harken, yett doe I feare greately his wante of meanes to satisfye them, 
and their unwiUingnes to forbeare, as may appeare by that which followeth 
touchinge my conference with the Prince Anhalt ; but I hope he shalbe able 
to paie the seconde monethe, or the moste parte therof, which Monsr. Du 
Plessis bringeth with him. 

Then, accordinge to your Majesties commandement i receaved by Sir Roger 
Williams, I shewed the Kinge that you required that paiement of halfe your 
money disbursed for him at the takinge of Roan, in respecte of your Majesties 
greater charges then by the articles of the accorde was required by him or 
promised by you ; whose answeare was, that the benefitt therof could not sa- 
tisfye your Majesties demands, and that his wantes were very greate. Not- 
withstandinge he offereth your Majestic shalbe your owne disposer and carver 
of that and any thinge ells he shall ever possesse ; other particuler promisses 
therof I could not procure from him. 

Lastely, I did geive him to understande, as so required in your Majesties 
name by Sir Roger Williams, that your Majestie did advise him to preserve 
all amitie with the Princes of his bloode, and especially with the Count Sois- 
sons, who was verie able to doe him service, and from whom the enemie de- 
sired much to withdrawe him selfe, wherof your Majestie had good ad- 
vertisement, and thoughte necessarie to advise him ; for the which the Kinge 
dothe yeald your Majestie great thanckes, and promiseth to followe your di- 
rections herein, and what soever ells. 

I have had no fitt opportunitie as yett to conferre with the Counte Soissons, 

1 See No. LXX. 



A. D. 1591.J 157 

as your Majestie willed mee by Sir Roger Williams ; but will verie shortely 
take some fitt occasion, accordinge to your pleasure signified by him. 

Touchinge any conference with the Prince Anhalte and the manner therof, 
your Majestie may please to understande that ^vithin two daies after my 
cominge to attende the Kinge, where after his speach had with him (which 
was fuU of passion and discontentement,) I tooke occasion to salute him, and 
to imparte to him that your Majestie had sent to him twoe letters, wherof one 
hadd ben sent to him and the messenger coulde not finde him ; and therfore 
for the better opportunitie of our meetinge, I requested him to dynner to mv 
lodginge, with such Princes and CoUonells as are come with him, and there 
he should receave your Majesties letters bothe to gether, with such further 
speech which your Majestie required me to deliver him, which he willingly 
accorded ; longing greately, as he saied, to heare from your Majestie, and 
usinge all dutiftdl ceremonies and wourdes of honor and reverence. And ac- 
cordinge to his promisse he failed not to come to dynner to my lodginge ; 
where, after delivery of my letters and due ceremonies, I used such speech 
in your Majesties name as mighte best expresse your regard bothe of him 
and the armye, and prepare his mynde to a better contentement, accordinge 
to your letter dirrected to him, and your directions geven me, and as the tyme 
and occasions did require ; which I forbeare to repeate, to spare your Majestie 
trouble. Wherunto he made answeare, that he held himself moste happy for 
this your Majestie's generall care of him and the armye, and also for your 
particuler favor to him selfe, which he saied he would ever duely esteeme and 
endevor to preserve ; vowinge all manner of faithfull service to your Majestie 
and thanckfuUnes. 

Then did he professe all thanckfuUnes and frendship to me, and promissed 
to conceale nothinge from mee. And so begane to utter the bitternes of his 
passion and discontement againste the Kinge, to whom he confessed he had 
ben before moste devoted, and from whom his mynde was as much nowe 
alienated for his breach of many promisses and just proceadings, as he 
tearmed them ; and so laied open the often mutynes of his armye, with the 
causes therof, and their nowe desperate and laste resolution presentlie to 
breake, which he affirmed nothinge should or could alter without the Kings 
paie of 232,000 crownes, which was due to them for two monethes already ex- 
pired ; and so concluded his speech with furie and manie greivious com- 
plaintes ; desiringe me, whom he greately trusted, to delyver my opinion and 
to advise him his best course. 



158 [November, 

My answeare was that I perceaved he had great reason to complaine and 
be greved, as I perceaved he was ; and did well knowe when your Majestie 
should have advertisement therof, that you would be greately oiFended with 
the Kinge, and thereuppon with drawe your forces and all manner of ayde 
from him, which might greately hinder the generall good, and therfore wished 
that it might be concealed from your Majestie in that respecte ; which speech 
I did the rather use because I gathered an intente in him to presse you with 
a further contribution. And concerninge my opinion which he desired, and 
my advice for his best counsell, I saied that albeit I was not able to advise 
him, yett by the way of discorse as a freinde, and not as an ambassador, I 
woulde not spare to speake plainely what I thought ; and therfore my opinion 
of his beste course was, that he should stay and suflFer for a tyme rather then 
suddenly to departe without the knowledge of your Majestie and the reste of 
the Princes of Germany ; and that sithence he was so greately ingaged in 
honor and profitt in this action, he mighte in consience and poUicie doe best 
to stay, and not to hazard the losse of bothe by his departure ; but to imitate 
the wiseste marchants, who havinge trusted verie farr badd creditors, do 
holde it beste for a tyme to forbeare, and to lend some what more, hopinge 
therby in tyme to recover the greateste parte of their former debt, rather 
then by discreditinge of them to loose all ; which I saied I plainly perceaved 
to be his case ; " for when the Kinge shall heare of your mutyne and sudden 
departure, he wiU then forbeare,'' saied I, " to paie you any parte of your due ; 
wheras by forbearinge a tyme, and by takinge of Roan, he wUbe able to paie 
you." And I saied I doubted not of his paiement of them at the cominge of 
Monsr. De Plessis their seconde monethes paie. I did also putt him in mynde 
of his late losse of the Duke of Saxe, and howe his honorable and discreete 
carriage of him selfe in this greate action might rayse him upp newe patrons, 
as your Majestie and the French Kinge ; and with many other protestations 
concluded my speech, wishinge him to take a better resolution then to departe 
and to have patience for a tyme, wherof I assured my selfe he coulde not 
repente him. 

Soe he gave me many thanckes, promisinge to stale untiLl he mighte heare 
from your Majestie to whom he hath written ; and demanded of me whether 
your Majestie would not aide the Kinge herein with a further contribution, 
without the which he saied the armey coulde not contynewe longe ; for he 
utterly dispaired of the Kinges meanes ; and their only hope was nowe in 



A. D. 1591. J 159 

your Majestic, and the reste of the Princes by your means, for the thirde 
monethe and the reste to come; wherin I did greately discomage him, al- 
leaginge your former expenses for bringinge in the armye, as also the aydinge 
the Kinge in Normandie and Brittanny, with manie and infinite somes of 
money. So he seemed to reste satisfyed, and we bothe departed, with many 
ceremonies and offers of frendshipp eatch to the other. 

The Kinge confesseth that if your Majestie had not written, and in your 
name so treated with him, that the army had broken before this tyme. And 
albeit the Kinge make paiement of the seconde monethe, which is 116,000 
crownes, they will not continewe longe after with out paiement of the third 
moneth ; which referringe to your Majesties consideration, cravinge further in- 
structions from you herein, to which purpose I have expreslie sent this gentle- 
man my secretarie, whom I have founde honeste and discreete and very for- 
warde to doe your Majestie service, and can particularly reporte the state of 
all things here, and can particularly discourse of the same. So cravinge pardon 
for my tediousnes and errors, wherin I had rather offend then omitt matter of 
substance or due circumstance ; I humbly comitt your Majestie to the pro- 
tection of the Highest. 

From the Campe before Roan, the 25th of November, 1591. 

Your Majesties moste humble and obedient 

servant and subject, 
Henry Unton. 



LXXXI. 
1591, 
25 Nov. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Lewcknor."' 

Accordinge to your Lordships directions I have had conference with the 
Prince Anhalte, whom I invited to dinner with the reste of the Princes and 
Collonells of his armey ; which made me more acceptable to them, and my 
speech to take the better effecte, althoughe to my greate charge, which I will 
spaire at noe tyme to doe her Majestie service ; for it is the only marke I 
shoote at. 

The effecte and manner of my conference with the Prince I have written to 

' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



160 [November, 

her Majestic, wher with I knowe your Lordship shalbe made acquainted ; and 
therfore will spaire to reporte it to ease your Lordship trouble therby. 

Her Majesties letters came in good tyme to the Prince Anhalte and did 
worke greate efFectes, otherwise the Almaigne armye had broken; all her 
Majesties former expenses had been frustrated ; and the King's service allto- 
gether overthrowen, as he hath since confessed. The Prince expecteth further 
contribution of her Majestie to the armye, and by her meanes to the Princes 
of Germany, wherin I had greately discoraged him, Notwith standings, he 
leaveth not to hope, and by his letters, as I thincke, maketh requeste for the 
same, for he utterly dispaiereth of the King's meanes, yett hathe he offered 
them the greateste parte of the seconde monethes paie, which is 116,000 
crownes, which Monsr. Plessis bringeth to morrowe with him. 

The army may stale for a tyme, but cannott contynue longe without ther 
pay for the third moneth, and so the Prince assureth me, and the Kinge 
plainely confesseth his unabUlitie to contente them therin ; and forthe with 
they will forsake him when he shall have moste need of them, respectinge 
ther owne profitt and nothinge ther honor. This dothe greately amaze and 
discontent the Kinge, findinge the Prince (who was well affected to his service 
and the only stale of the armye,) to become now a mutyner with the reste. 
My humble desire to your Lordship is to advise me howe I shall proseade 
herin in case of extremitie when they begine to breake ; which I feare wilbe 
uppon the retourne of her Majesties answeare to the Prince, if she yealde no 
more contribution ; and so leave the consideration of this waightie cause to 
your Lordships aprovement, expectinge answeare with all speed, for which 
purpose I have sent this gentleman my Secretary, 

Some merchants of London, as I gather, have made offer to the Kinge to 
finde him money, or geive him creditt for wares, wheruppon he moved me to 
write to your Lordship to knowe whether her Majesties will permitt him to 
take upp so much cloathe of them in London as will pay the Almjm armye 
theire thirde monethes due, which he saieth the Prince will accepte. Your 
Lordships oppinion herin I desire to knowe, that I male answeare the Kinge 
accordingly. He hathe offered to paie them a greate parte in wyne at a rea- 
sonable rate, which he hathe at Mantes and other places, and cannott sell. 
This offer they refuse, which was not likely, if they intended to take any 
manner of comodities for their paie. Manie doubte of their acceptance before 
of it. 



A. D. 1591.] 161 

The strength of the Abnaigne army is greately decaied, wherof the horse 
are not nowe above 3,000, the Lansquenetts 4,000, and Temples regiment 
wanteth of 1,000. They doe dye daylie of sickness, and wante of foode, and 
garments to clothe them. 

I have urged the Kinge, as your Lordship willed me, to sende forces into 
BryttaLae accordinge to promise, and acquainted him with Montgomery and 
Laverdines cominge to the borders of Bryttanny, and theire shorte staie theire, 
which the Kinge saieth shalbe amended ; assuringe me that Laverdine was 
nowe their, and that Sir John Norris refused to come to rayse the seege 
against Blyne, which thereby he saieth is loste, wherwith the Kinge is much 
discontented ; and layeth greate faulte uppon Sir John Norrys for refiisinge 
often tymes to come when he was required, which, as he saied, was partely the 
cause of Laverdines departure. But the Kinge hath nowe written expresly to 
Laverdine to continewe their, and afl&amp;rmeth that the Prince D'Ombes hathe 
sente one to her Majestic to informe her of the state of that countrey, and 
with oflFer of his service their accordinge to her directions. 

Monsr. Buzenvall dothe advertise the Kinge that the States will ayde him 
to cleare Bryttannye, and the reste of the sea coaste, so her Majestic will do 
the like ; I answeared him that her Majesties forces and purse had hitherto 
abydden the brunt of that service, and wished they would do as much. Herof 
I thought good to advertise your Lordship. 

The King is advertised that the Duke of Parma is uppon the frontieres of 
France, and readie to enter in, and was seene to march with his whole army 
of 1,600 horse and foote. His aryvinge, and the Reyters mutine, dothe much 
perplex the Kinge ; and he hathe sente for all the nobillytie of France to come 
to him. 

It is here bruted that the Turke prepareth 300 saile of shippes to sett to the 
seas this nexte yeare, which the Kinge wisheth might by her Majestie's meanes 
be turned againste the Kinge of Spaine to overthrowe his designes against 
France and England. This he wished me to move to her Majestie. 

My former newes of the attempte to kill the Duke of Guise is not con- 
firmed and very unlike to be trewe, for that he contineweth with the Duke de 
Maynes army ; yet was it held before to be moste assured. 

The counsell of 16 erected in Paris for their government have written to 
the Kinge of Spaine to sende them a Kinge over them of his owne bloode, 
which letters are intercepted, and shall shortely be published. The Duke de 



162 [NOVEMBEK, 

Mayne was privie their unto, as is saied, and is nowe at Paris with 300 horse, 
intendinge to succor this towne. 

This gentleman can sufficiently enforme your Lordship of the state of 
thinges here more at large, who hathe ben very forwarde to doe her Majestie 
service ; a gentleman verie honeste and discreete, and carefuU to geive her 
Majestie good testimony of his duty : and so referre the reste to his reporte, 
and to this inclosed of common occurrences, ' wherof I hold the moste parte 
to be trewe, and aU verie probable and creadibley advertised. So I humbly take 
my leave. 

From the Campe before Roan, this 25th of November, 1591. 

Your Lordships to commande, 
Henry Unton. 



LXXXIL 

1591, 

25 Nov. " Occurrences from diverse partes, sente with the above 
written letters by my Cosen Lewcknor." "^ 

By letters of the Leaguers intercepted it appeareth ther is a newe Pope 
created at Rome called Innocent the 9th, and before named Santiquatro, alias 
Fachinetto ; the which notwithstandinge is not helde to be of creditt, for that 
the opinion is here rather that the Venetians and Duke of Florence will intro- 
duce one of ther faction, and not suffer the Kinge of Spaine more to cary awaie 
the choise from them. 

The dearth contineweth stUl in Ittaly verry greate ; and would be worse, if 
they were not so abundantly furnished with corne from the East Countries 
and Holland, from whence there are of late 80 shippes loden therof passed 
thither. 

Out of Germany it is advertised that the Emperor beginnethe to make 
warres upon the countreys of the Duke of Saxe and the Duke of Julyers and 

• See the following document. No. LXXXII. 

- The original copy is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1591.] 163 

Cleave, and that the Kinge of Spaine intendeth to assiste him therin with 
parte of his forces out of the Lowe Countries ; which dothe much amaze and 
stagger the Princes of Germainie. 

The peace which the saied Emperor sollicited betweene the Kinge of Spaine 
and his subjectes of the Lowe Countreyes is utteriy rejected, and he in no 
manner of hope to prevaile therin. 

Of the preparations in Spaine it is advertised that the same dothe amounte 
to 16,000 foote and 3,000 horse; but touchinge the place of their imployment, 
the opinion is yett doubtfuU; some houldinge that they are intended for 
Bryttaigne ; others that they shall enterprise some what uppon England ; and 
others of a third opinion, that they are to be sente into Arragon, to suppresse 
the insurrections there, where it is saied there is a late newe revolte. 

It it also certefied that the Kinge of Spaine standeth greately in feare of 
beinge assailed this next yeare by the Turks, because of the preparation which 
he maketh of 300 galleys to putt to the seas, and therfore practiseth by all 
means to stale the same, havinge offered 100,000 to the Turkes favorittes for 
the effectinge therof. 

One that assureth the Kinge to have scene the Duke of Parma at Vallence 
hathe this dale advertised him therof, and that he marcheth with his armye ; 
which he reporteth dothe consiste of 2,500 Reyters, 2,000 horse of his owne, 
2,000 Spaniards which were before mutyned, 3,000 Wallons and 3 regements 
of Lansquenettes. The Duke of Florence useth all means to drawe the Duke 
of Lorrayne from the Spanishe faction, wherof some good hope is conceaved ; 
and in that respecte the Kinge forbeareth to suffer his Almaigne armie to spoile 
the Duke of Lorraignes countrey ; as otherwise he mighte have donne, to the 
saied Dukes greate hurte and impovershinge. 

Of the Lowe Countreys newes I forbeare to write ought to your Lordship, 
because I know your Lordship receaveth better intelligenc from better hands. 

Reporte is come heither that Marseilles is rendered to the Kinge's obedience, 
which hathe brought greate joye to every man, and that they have recalled and 
restored to their estates all the Kings good servants that before were exiles ; 
and in better shewe of their dutie, have also disarmed twoe of the Kinge of 
Spaines galleys, and one of the Duke of Savoyes, which were there. 

The Countesse of Saulx who hath ben the greateste practiser for the Duke 
of Savoie, and in a manner governed the whole affaires of Province, beinge 
uppon some jallowsie imprisoned by the saied Duke in Aix, wherat she con- 



164 [November, 

ceived deepe discontentement, founde the means by the corruptinge of her 
garde and disguisinge her selfe in mans apparell, coulered also with the 
wearinge of a beard, to make her escape ; from whence she conveyed her selfe 
to Marseilles wher she hath donne verie speiciall good offices of service for 
the Kinge. 

Out of those partes of Province it is further advertised that the moste of the 
nobiUitye there are turned to the King's obedience. And that Monsr. La 
VaUette and De Diguieres have lately taken the towne of Digne, a buishopricke 
in the fore saied province, together with the castel of Comars near Aix and 
likewise the castell of Cucurron, also in that province ; and besides have raised 
the seege of Carcasonne in Languedoc, which the Marshall Joyeuse beseeged, 
as also the seege of the casteU of Peche neare Aix, invested by the Duke of 
Savoye. 

Monsr. De Diguiers by him selfe hath also taken Barcelonette bordringe in 
the frontiers of Dauphine, and Premont, and beinge of the Kings owne patri- 
monie. The Prince Conty hath taken Seeles in Berry, and is nowe before St. 
Poursainte in Burbonnois, which cannott holde out, because the Governor and 
2 or three of the beste captaines are saied to be taken in a salley made. The 
gayninge wherof wUbe of greate importance to the King's service in those 
partes, bothe in respecte of the place it selfe, and also for that the Duke of 
Nemors chiefe provision of cannons and munition is remayninge there. 

Monsr. Turrenne hathe taken by scallado the towne of Astenay in Lor- 
raigne, wherin were then remayninge foure companies of foote and a cornett 
of horse. And St. Valery in Picardie is nowe also beseiged, and hoped to be 
rendred to the Kinges obedience, by the Duke of Nevers. 

The Duke of Mayne is come to Paris with 400 horse, where it is saied he 
hathe communicated unto the towne his purpose to place a Spainard Gover- 
nor there ; which the people not likinge, fell theruppon manie of them into 
mutinie ; and the comander of the Bastile, fearinge that therby woulde foUowe 
also his displacinge, hathe betaken him to his defence, and vowethe not to 
render the castell into their hands ; whereuppon the Duke hathe sente for his 
cannons to batter it, and meaneth after the takinge therof to builde a cittadell. 

Dyverse doe daylie come out of this towne of Roan, bothe souldiers and 
burgesses, and moste of their beste captens and souldiers are hurte and slaine. 
The Kinge is nowe rearinge his gabions to plante the cannon to batter the 
forte of Mount St. Catherine. 



A. D. 1591.] 165 

Since the writinge herof other advertisement is come of takinge of the 
towne of Castellon in Gasconny by batterie by the Kings people there, a place 
of greate importance. 



LXXXIII. 

1591, 

25 Nov. " To the Lord Chancellor ; by my Cosen Lewcknor." 

My very good Lord. I do [send] your Lordship hereinclosed a coppie of 
my letters to her Majestic, and an other of myne to my Lord Threasurer, as 
also a somarie of all our comon occurences; whereby your Lordship male 
perceive her Majesties comandements, my proceadinges, and such advertise- 
ments as I have ; all which I submitt to your Lordships sound judgment and 
censure, from whome I crave admonition of my errors. 

This greate action cannott subsiste lonnge if the Almane army breeke, which 
is the only stale and strengthe therof ; especially nowe the Duke of Parma 
cometh to dwell and make a contynuall warre. And if her Majestic had not 
written to the Prince Anhalte, and I in her name used some further speech 
besides, feastinge of him and all the princes, collonells and moste parte of the 
nobillitie of the armye, I assure your Lordship they had not staied thus longe ; 
which the Kinge and his counsell have confessed. 

The Kings estate is moste misserable, his wantes greate, and his meanes 
not able to give him maintenance for him selfe and his French, muche lesse 
for strangers ; and if her Majestic doe not beare the whole burthen, which is 
intollerable, he must needs fall. He often solliciteth me to write, and I as 
often discourage him from further hopes from her Majestic ; yett dothe my 
Lord Generall make him beleeve and hope for greate matters, which wourketh 
some tymes the Kings offence towards mee. Notwithstandinge I make my 
owne peace presentely with him, and I finde him very well affected to 
my selfe. 

My lord Generall promiseth to retoume with greate forces; but if her 
Majestic would staye him there, I doubte not to satisfie the Kinge theriii. 
And in my opinion it would every way further her Majesties service moste ; 
which I only write to your Lordship and leave to your consideration. 



166 [NOVEMBEK, 

What course her Majestic will take with this Almaigne armye I beseeche 
your Lordship to be pleased to lett me knowe, that I maye accordingly pro- 
ceade with them. I am loathe to prognosticate, but to your Lordship I will 
speake my mynde, that if her Majestie and the Princes of Germany doe not 
yealde a further contribution, all her Majesties former expenses wHbe caste 
away ; and they will breake and goe to the enemie when the Kinge shall have 
moste neede of them ; such I knowe to be their resolution. 

This gentleman, my secretary, I have expreshe sent with this dispatch, by 
whom I crave a presente answeare, and her Majesties resolution and direc- 
tions. He hathe behaved him selfe well in this service, and is of good 
judgment and discretion, who can reporte the state of things here concerninge 
the publicke and my poore private ; whom your Lordship maie heare at your 
leasure. 

I muste recommend to your Lordship's favor Mr. Wright, my minister, for 
whom your Lordship hath before written to the College for leave for him to 
stale with me, and for the benefitt of his Colledge, which is dewe. He is a 
verie honeste man, and of greate learninge aud discreation, and the greatest 
comforte of my lief here ; I beseach your Lordship once more to graunte him 
the like letters as before. So longinge greatly to heare of your Lordships 
amendment and increase of healthe, for the which I daylie praye, I moste 
humbhe take my leave in haste. From the Campe before Roan, the 25th of 
November, 1591. 

Yours Lordships moste bounden to serve you, 

Henry Unton. 



LXXXIV. 

1591. 

25 Nov. " To Mr. Vice Chamberline ; by my Cosen Lewcknor." 

I have written heretofore to your Honor two letters ; the one by Le Roy the 
messenger, the other by the King's currier, with a packett of her Majesties 
directed to Otwell Smythe. The firste miscarried, for the messenger was 
taken prisoner; the seconde I hope your Honor hathe receaved. If my 
healthe and leaisure would have permitted me I had more often have written 



A. D. 1591.J l(i7 

to your Honor, whose favor I desire to preserve, and ■will indeavor to deserve 
with my beste fortune. 

The feare of breakinge of the Almaigne armie doth greately amase the 
Kinge, and all us here ; the rather for wante of meanes to reconcile them. 
They exclaime and mutyne for two monethes paie due to them, which amount- 
ethe to 232,000 crownes, wherof the Kinge is not able to paie the one halfe. 
And had not her Majestic written her moste gratious letters to the Prince of 
Anhalte, exortinge and perswadinge him to persevere, I assure your Honor 
nothinge ells coulde have staied them, as the Kinge and his counseU confesse; 
such was their resolution, and so greate was their discontentment. But I 
feare they will not continewe longer without her Majesties further contribu- 
tion, and the reste of the Princes of Germanye; for the Kinge wanteth meanes 
to satisfye them, which mlbe their undoinge. Herof I thought necessary to 
advertise your Honor, who can beste consider the misserye of the Kings 
estate here, and advise the remedie for the same ; and so leave the considera- 
tion therof to your grave wisedome. 

Concerninge our occurrences here I referr your Honor to the inclosed, 
wherby you maye perceave advertisements from many places, and of all sortes. 
I will not force your Lordships beleif of them, albeit they be crediblye adver- 
tised, and many of them confirmed ; yett in the beleife of them I am rather a 
philosopher then a divine. 

I will not write more, because this bearrer is able to informe your Honor at 
large of the state of things here, neither have I leaisure in respecte of my 
dispatche to her Majestic. I will therfore conclude with a petition to your 
Honor, which is to crave your opinion of my rawe dealinge here in suche 
matters of waite as her Majestic employeth me in, wherwith I know shee will 
acquainte you, whose judgment shee much estcameth and I greately reverence. 
And soe I humbly take my leave. This 25th of November, 1591. 

Your Honors ever to command, 

Henry Unton. 



168 [November, 



LXXXV. 

1591, 

26 Nov. " From Sir Robert Cecyll ; receaved by Payne, the 

16th of December." 

Sir, I have not written to you of this misfortune, because I knewe howe 
greivous it would be nnto your mjmde, and lothe I was to be the messenger of 
your sorrowe, which fame I knewe would bringe to you to soone. What tyme 
dothe with unwise men, that lett judgment wourke with them. Dictum sapienti 
sat est. 

Here is brought over a constante reporte of your good carriage there, agrea- 
ble with your place, and greatley to the Queens honor, thoughe to your owne 
no smale charge. Diverse there be that seeme to reporte your greate desire to 
retourne. I knowe yt not from you, and therfore knowe not what to say. If 
you shall acquainte me, you shall finde that no mans deathe shall deminishe 
my love to you professed. The Queene, I thincke, dothe write that you 
should abate your charge. I would doe in your particular what beste may 
like you ; for whether you doe desire or not your retourne, I thincke if it be 
not weU. used, it may prejudice your reputation as much as otherwise content 
you beinge discreetly handled. And thus leavinge all other particularities to 
my Lordships letters, I rest as ready to doe you pleasure or service, as any 
friende you have lyvinge. From the Corte, the 26th of November, 1591. 

Your lovinge friend moste ass\iredly, 
To the right honorable Sir Robert Cecyll. 

Henry Unton, Ambassador. 



LXXXVI. 

1591, 

26 Nov. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved by Payne, 

the 16th of December." 

Sir, For that I doe not finde by any your late letters, where you should be, 
althoughe I conjecture that by reason of the Kinges lyinge at the seege before 



A. D. 1591.] 169 

Roan, you are likely to be at Deepe ; which if you should be, I am bolde to 
praie you to cause the letters herewith sente to be delivered, by the which 
he is directed some thinges for her Majesties service ; for the stayinge of the 
companies that shall come out of the Lowe Countries, theire at Deepe, or in 
the partes their aboutes, untill further order shalbe dirrected from hence for 
their marchinge to the Campe. 

The occasion of this my present writinge unto you is, that you woulde by all 
the meanes you could, infourme your selfe whether anie money shalbe brought 
by Monsr. De Plessis, or any other, for the paiement of the Reyters, as her 
Majestie is enformed ther is an expectation of; which when you shall under- 
stand, I pray you to advertise me therof, assoone as you can, and what the 
same shalbe. And so untill better leisure maie serve me to write at more 
lengthe, I comende me hartely unto you. From the Corte, the 26th of No- 
vember, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freinde. 

To my honorable good friende. Sir Will. Burqhley. 

Henry Unton, Knight, her Majes- 
ties Ambassador with the French 
Kinge. 



LXXXVII. 



1591, 

29 Nov. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Sir Christopher 

Lytcott." ' 

My verie good Lord, Albeit I did write verie lately to your Lordship, yett 
the fitt opportunitye of this gentleman, Sir Christopher Lytcott, dothe oflFer 
me such occasion as I would not lett him passe without my letters to your 
Lordship, therby to advertise you, what hathe happened since my laste dis- 
patch, as foUoweth. 

' The original letter, with marginal notes by Lord Burghlcy, is preserved in the State Paper OflSce 

Z 



170 [November, 

The Prince Anhalte was shott in the foot accompaninge the Kinge in his 
trenches in the night the 26th of this moneth, which dothe putt him to verie 
greate paine, for that it is feared the buUett remaineth within. He is in 
no danger but of the losse of one of his toes, the manner of whose hurte I 
leave to this gentleman's reporte. 

He was resolved, if this accident had not happened, to goe into England ^ 
to doe his dutie to her Majestie, and acquainte her with the causes of the 
armyes mutyne. He and the reste of the Collonells came to the Kinge, 
since my laste letters, to take their leave and to departe, for that at the com- 
inge of Monsr. Du Plessis, they were offered 60,000 crownes, which he 
brought with him, and noe more ; whereuppon the Kinge sente for me in all 
haste, and requested me to use all fitt perswations for their staye and reason- 
able contentement. And with much adoe have prevailed thus much with the 
Prince, that wheras 3 monethes whole paie is nowe dewe to him and the 
armie, he and the reste are contented to stale, and to make a newe accorde, 
so that they male have presentlie one monethes paie and the other two 
monethes at the ende of Januarye ; and for that which shall growe dewe in 
the meane tyme, he offereth such conditions as I shall thincke reasonable. 
This I have moved to the Kinge, wherof he hath not yett accepted ; but I am 
in some hope it will take eiFecte, if the Kinge can paie this one monethes 
paie, at the firste, which he endevoreth with all possible meanes. Other ac- 
corde than this they will not make, and at the paiement of the other two 
monethes paie in Januarie, they are contented to make moster, and after- 
wards to be paied by newe roUes. I assure your Lordship if I had not often 
travelled betweene the Kinge and the Prince of Anhalt, and used all meanes 
for their reconcilUation, the army had broken longe before this tyme. 

The Kinge hopethe greately of her Majesties further aide herein, especially 
for the paiement in Januarye 5 for I doubt not he will paie one monethes paie 
presentely, as he promisethe me. I have altogether discouraged him from 
any such hope, and nowe his only requeste is that he may have creditt in 
London for clothe to paie his armye one monethes due ; but the Prince will 
not accepte more in clothe then one halfe monethes paie. 

Assone as all things are agreed, I will sende to your Lordship the effecte 
therof with all speede, and in the meane season crave such directions from 
your Lordship in this matter, as may better instructe me. I have the rather 

' Prince of Anhalt to come, [marginal note J 



A. D. 1591.] 171 

pressed the Kinge to a present conclusion with the armye, to avoyde her Ma- 
jesties charge. And if it take good effecte, I will advise the Prince to take 
some manner of assurance for the same, which I knowe the Kinge will not 
deny ; albeit I assure my selfe he will not be able to paie them accordingly. 
By which meanes his officers of the fynances wilbe the more wUlinge to pro- 
vide money, wherin otherwise they wilbe slacke ; and the Prince and the 
Kinge cannott then urge her Majestic for contribution, or she be forced to 
yeald ther unto. Hereof I doe the more particularlie advertise your Lord- 
ship, because I would knowe wherin I have erred, and howe I may proceede 
better for her Majesties contentement, which I only desire to procure by my 
service here. 

The Kinge saieth he will geive good securietie for the clothe he desireth to 
take upp uppon credit, and craveth a resolution with all dilligence herein. 

It is advertised from Paris, that Clerc, who was Governor of the Bastile in 
Paris, is made prisoner by the Duke de Maine, forhavinge procured the exe- 
cution of the President Brisson and the reste, with out forme of justice ; and 
hathe placed againe Monsr. de Belin in the goverment of the towne, with 
three regiements of French, and licensed the Spaniards, Wallons and Strangers 
to departe. This is contrary to the former advertisements, and to good newes 
to be trewe. 

Monsr. De Pompadour, Governor of the league in Lymosine, an Italian, 
and one of their beste leaders, is dead. And Mons. Lyment is also dead, who 
was esteemed by the Leaguers. 

The Cardinall of Bourbon, the Chancellor and the three Bishopes that 
came to Noyon to the Kinge, wherof your Lordship was before advertised, are 
come to the campe, expreslie to perswade the Kinge to be instructed in their 
Catholicke faithe, as also to conclude a peace with his subjectes, wherof they 
seeme to assure the Kinge. Hee putteth them in hope that he wilbe become 
a Catholicke, as him selfe confesseth to me ; and did were two dales together 
a cloacke of the order of St. Espritt, — wherat the common sorte doe greately 
rejoyce; also he ofFereth them to conclude a peace with reasonable conditions, 
which I beleeve to be impossible. 

The Kinge looseth no tyme in his approaches to Mount St. Catherine, and 
is their earely and verie late in the night, plantinge the cannons. He 
wantethe greately our pyoners and souldiers, which her Majestic hathe lately 
grawnted him, but I heare the pyoners be arryved at Deepe. 



I&gt;j2 [November, 

Other occurrences I have none wourthy your Lordships advertisement, 
wherof I will not longer interrupte your Lordships waightie affaires, but 
humbly take my leave and comitt your Lordship to the protection of the 
Almightie. 

The Campe, this 29th of November, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 

[The following postscripts are appended to the original.] 

This gentleman hath served the King with greate valewe and forwardnes, 
whome I expressely sende to bringe me worde of my honorable Lord Chan- 
celor's healthe, wherof heare is a badd bruit, and discontenteth me greatly. 
Hee retometh to me with all speede, by whome I humbly beseeche I may re- 
ceave your awnswere. 

The King doth often sende to me for newes out of Englonde, whereof yf yt 
may please your Lordship to permytt your Secretary somtymes to advertise 
me, your Lordship shall therin doe me a very greate favor. 



LXXXVIII. 



1591, 

29 Nov. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved by Payne, 

the 16th of December." 

After my verie hartie commendations to your Lordship. By my late 
letters I signified her Majesties pleasure to your Lordship that those troupes 
that shoulde come out of the Lowe Countreyes to Deepe, for the service of 
the French Kinge, might remaine at or aboute Deepe, untill her Majesties 
pleasure were knowen for their marchinge to the reste of the forces afore Roan, 
her Majestic hathe nowe changed her purpose for theirs, or the mynores or 



A. D. 1591.J 173 

pynors stale ; and would have them, assoone as they shall arryve, to be di- 
rected to goe to the Campe, there to joyne with the reste of the Englishe 
troupes ; wherof it may please your Lordship to geive them knowledge uppon 
their arryvall, and to helpe to accommadate them with such aide as they shall 
wante for their more safe gettinge theither. For Sparhawke, her Majesties 
pleasure is that he should retourne from Deepe. And so I commend me to 
your Lordship. 

From the Corte, this 29th of November, 1591. 

Your Lordships verie lovinge freinde, 

To the right honorable Sir Henrye Will. Burgley. 

Unton, Knight, her Majesties Ambas- 
sador in Fraunce. 



LXXXIX. 

1591, 

29 Nov. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 1 6th of 

December, by Payne." 

My Lord Ambassador. I can only let you knowe that your Secretary, Mr. 
Lewcknor, arrived this after noone, and hath brought a full dispatch from you, 
wherof her Majestic hath had, receaved, and redd your wise letters clearelie 
written, wherin her Majestie commendethe your verie circumspecte negotiat- 
inge with the Prince Anhalt, and redd his letters also to her Majestie, who 
reporteth trewly your treatie with him and your answeares, without geiving 
anie hope of newe releife from her Majestie, but yett he presseth the Kinge 
therin more eamestely then contenteth her. The only hope and grownd 
therof must be by the recovery of Roan. Escepte the Kinge paie the Rey- 
ters, her Majestie will not continewe her forces. 

The forces from the Lowe Countreyes are nowe to goe to the Campe ; and 
so within a dale or two I will write more. 

29th November, 1591. 

Your Lordships assured lovinge freinde, 

Will. Burgley. 



174 [November, 

I sende to you a true reporte of the fighte this somer. 

You are evill advertised there to doubt of the newe Popes Election, beinge 
chosen, and hathe refused dirrectly to sende any money to the Italian armye, 
wishinge the Spanishe Cardinells to gett it of the Kinge of Spaine. 

To the right honorable, my verie lov- 
inge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, Knight, 
her Majesties Ambassador resident in 
Fraunce. 



XC. 

1591, 

29 Nov. " From Sir Robert Cecyll ; receaved by Payne, 

the 16th of December." 

Sir. Althoughe by my laste I write unto you of that matter I thought fitt 
you should knowe, yett can I not but reviue it againe. Some sale you would 
come home to take order with your debtes ; others say you would not, be- 
cause you live nowe in protection. To conclude with you, let your freindes 
knowe what you would have ; for this is the voice generall but of fooles and 
sicophantes, and therfore freyvolous. I have redd your letters to the Queene, 
beinge very longe, and yett no wourd omitted but redd to her ; and I protests 
to you she liked your negotiatinge with the Prince Anhalte exceedinge well, 
bothe for the manner and matter you delivered. 

The Prince write a letter also, which she founde to concure with your de- 
lyverie ; so as I can assure you, your services are well allowed. The troupes 
of the Lowe Countreys are, I thincke, arryved before my letters can be with 
you. 

Of my Lord of Essex his personall repaire, it is yett in greate question, and 
shall not be resolved of these two or three daies. The debtes of my [Lord] 
Chancellor under his owne hande are found to be 56,000Z. to the Queene, and 
to the subjecte 14,000/. ; a huge somme. His executors are Gascoigne and 



A. D. 1591.J 175 

Dodington, but all accomptable to Sir William Hatton, his heyre. You have 
what I knowe, and so I reste your affectionate freinde, 

Robert Cecyll, 
To the right honorable my verie 
lovinge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, 
Ambassador. 



XCI. 

1591, 

1 Dec. " From the Lord Threasurer; receaved the 18th 

by Payne." ' 

My Lord Ambassador. For that my Lord of Essex, the Generall, is comen 
from thence, and his retourne for the tyme not verie certeine, and that Sir 
Thomas Leighton and Mr. Henerie Killegrewe, are also ^ comen from thence, 
I am bolde in the Queens name to laie the burthen of certein thinges hereafter 
foUowinge uppon you ; prayinge you accordinge to the nature of the causes to 
deale with the Marshall of your Campe and Serjant Major and other officers 
respectively, to take care of those thinges foUowinge. 

First, there are 400 pyoners, I thincke, arryved there at Deepe, and I hope 
are by some convoy safely come to the campe ; and there be 50 myners sent 
out of Comewall, who, I thincke, also will shortely come to Deepe ; and for 
that I perceive by Sir Edmond Yorkes letters, and by my Lord of Essex re- 
porte unto me, that he beinge appointed to the office of Trench Master of the 
feild is the meetest to take the charge of those pyoners and myners, I pray 
you deale with him therin, that they maye be well ordered and paied by the 
Threasurers deputy their weekely lendinges, as other souldiers are, for thoughe 
they have ben imprested as souldiers, yett it may be they will doe as good 
service as manie souldiers in some watches, when they be not over labored in 
the daie tyme ; as by my owne experience I knewe at Bullen a notable de- 

' The original letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 42. 
^ Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



176 [December, 

feate of a cheife nomber of French souldiers, that secretlie were sente to enter 
into the towne, and were by the pioners in the night almoste all either taken 
or slaine. 

There are also to come out of the Lowe Countreys seven bandes of old 
souldiers, which if they be not already come to Deepe, I thincke wiU be 
shortelie theire. I pray you therfore consider howe they may safely come 
from thence to the Campe, and there to serve in the Campe, as in reason they 
oughte to doe, to renforce your weake companies that are their. 

There is also sente thither to Deepe 25 lastes of powder, and certeyne 
pykes, which thoughe it be paied for by the Englishe Marchants, could hardly 
have beene spared from thence, consideringe the greate preparations we are 
forced to make againste this nexte yeare to withstande the Kinge of Spaines 
greate forces intended againste this realme, bothe by sea and land, and so I 
praie you lett it appeare unto the French Kinge ; for indeed a good parte 
therof was provided and made ready for the Queens owne store. 

Thus am I bolde to committ to you these martiall causes, by reason of the 
absence of the Lord Generall, and his two assistants.' 
From Westminster, the firste of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships assuredhe, 

I doe assure you her Majestic, as their Will. Bubghley. 

is cause, hath allowed your last letters 
and treatie with the French Kinge, and 
the Prince of Anhalt, as verie wisely 
perfourmed. 

To my honorable good freind. Sir 
Henry Unton, Knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador resident in Fraunce. 

' The remainder of the letter with the postscript is in Burghley's writing. 



A. D. 1591.] 17 



/ / 



XCII. 
1591, 
I Dec. " From Mr. Fortescue ; receaved by Payne, the 16th. '^ ' 

The sudden departure of your servant, who came unto me beinge readye to 
departe, and my bussines which gave me no leisure, maketh me to be thus 
shorte. The death of your owne good freinde my late Lord Chancellor, I 
knowe cannott but be greivous unto you. His broken estate and greate 
debtes accumulate our sorrowe, but to enlarge in lamentation dothe encrease 
in greefe. Since his Lordships deathe some speaches have ben of you and 
your service. It were good you did remember to write to her Majestie as 
ofte as matter wourth her knowledge occureth ; for her Majestie expectethe 
so much. Your greate charge in service it were not amisse you moderated, as 
soone as you may, leaste your charges be not regarded so well as your freinds 
could wishe. This by the way of counsell I make bolde to advertise you of, 
for in this tyme of scarcetie and intoUerable expenses, rewards will growe 
could. If anie waies I may stande you in steed, I wilbe readye to perfournic 
my good will, and so with my comendations, I comitte you to God. 

From the Cort at Whitehall, this firste of December, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freinde 

and cosen, 

To my honorable good freinde and Jo. Fortescue. 

Cosen, Sir Henry Unton, Knight, Lord 
Ambassador for her Majestie, resident 
in France. 

' The original letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 180. 



1/8 [December, 



XCIII. 

1591, 

2 Dec. " From Mr. Vice Chamberlyn ; receaved the 19th 

by Capten Conwey." ' 

Sir, your letters of the 25th of November with the advertisements sente me 
ther inclosed, and one other of a former date, I have only receaved since your 
departure hence ; the which your writinge and those your advertisements I 
accepte of verie kindley at your hands ; and ^ so as when you please to im- 
parte unto me that which passeth in that troublesome realme, no manes 
writinge shalbe more welcome or freindelier taken. 

Wher you desier my furtherance to contynewe her Majesties good opinion 
of your service there, I finde your service so acceptable and pleasinge to her 
Highnes that fewe have ben better ; yett uppon all occasions that maie ad- 
vance the same in future tyme, thoughe you have loste a moste deare and 
honorable good freinde of my late Lord Chancellor, you shall finde me ever 
faithfuU, ready, and carefiill for your good, either towards her Highnes or 
other wise in that you please to use me in, either for the publicke, or that 
which any waie may conceme your particular. 

And even so with my very harty commendations to your selfe, and like 
thanckes for your laste letters and advertisements from sundrey partes, I 
wishe you as to my selfe. 

From the Corte at White Hall, the seconde of December, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freinde. 

To my honorable good freind, Sir Tho. Henage. 

Henry Unton, Knight, her Majes- 
ties Ambassador resident in France. 

1 The original of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 182. 
^ Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1591.] 179 



XCIV. 
1501, 
3 Dec. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Capten Morgan." ' 

My honorable good Lord. Since my laste letters sente to your Lordship 
by Sir Christopher Lyttcott, the Kinge and the Prince Anhalt are in this 
manner agreed by my earnest mediation, — That all the Reytters and Lansque- 
netts under the Princes conduct shalbe presently satisfyed with one monethes 
paie, 2 and as much more at the latter end of January nexte ; and for the 
fourth monethe, nowe also expired, and the other two that will rune out in 
the interim, they cannott as yett agree. But the Prince and his collonells doe 
by wourd faithfully promise to serve the Kinge untill the ende of January ; 
and then if they receave ther due, to make a newe accorde in writinge, and to 
make a new muster, and to be paied by newe roUes. 

Also this day, at the Princes request, execution is made of twelve Lansque- 
netts here in the camp, and more shall foUow, to the number of twentie, for 
their former mutynes.^ So they receive payment and punishment together. 

* Monsr. Du Plessis, and Monsr. Sancy with others are this day departed 
towardes the army of Reyters aboute Gamaches, whetlier they carrie suffici- 
ent sommes of money for their one monethes paie ; and the King ^omiseth 
with all speed to sende monie likewise to the Reyters who are with Monsr. de 
Nevers at St. Vallery ; but noe order is as yett taken for the companys of 
Temple and Rebours, who depende not of the Prince Anhalt, but imediately 
of the Kinge. 

5 The Kinge knoweth noe means howe to performe his promise in January, 
as he saieth, and urgethe an answear of his former requeste for creditt for 
clothe with the merchants in London, gevinge good assurance for the same, 
and would willingly borrowe of her Majestie 30,000 crownes ; wherin I have 

' Tlie original draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 252 ; the 
original letter, with marginal notes, is found in the State Paper Office. 

2 The Reisters and Lansquenetts satisfied with one monthes pay tjU the latter end of January, 
[marginal note.] Here begins the Cottonian draft. 

' Execution of 12 lansq. for tlieir former mutineys. [marginal note.] 

• De Plessis gone with the moneths pay. [marginal note.] 

' The K. uppon security desires creditt for cloath. [marginal note.] 



180 [December, 

utterly discouraged him, and requested him to forbeare anie such motion. 
What he hathe done by his letters therin, I know not. 

The Cathohckes doe greately mishke a clause in the former accorde made 
for the Kinge with the Prince Anhalte concerninge the cause of the cominge 
and continuance of the Almayne armye to establishe the Reformed religion in 
Fraunce ; which they sale they will not suffer to be inserted in the newe 
accorde. 

Some of the better sorte of them have labored greately to hinder their 
agreemente with the Kinge; as men fearefuU of the Kinges over much 
greatnes; hopinge to compeU him by meere necessitie to become a Catholicke; 
as may appeare by all their actions, and especially by this action of Roan, 
wherin I assure your Lordship they rather seake to hinder him then further 
his good. 

Notwithstandinge by the Kings vigillancie and contynuaUy paines we hope 
of good successe ; albeit heitherto they have loste tyme, for wante of pioners, 
men, munition, and money. The French have no courage to attempte. The 
Lansquenetts, untill their paie, will not ; and the Englishe are so fewe, poore, 
and sickley, as they cannott effecte any thinge of them selves. They die and 
sicken daylie to the nomber of 12 and 14, as it is thought, partly for wante of 
foode, which is lamentable ; and without Englishe companies, the King hopeth 
of littel^ood heare, as he hathe cause in my poore opinion. 

By a letter of Villars,i the Governor of Roan, intercepted verie lately, 
written to the Duke of Mayne, it appeareth that the wante of men and muni- 
tion, and the feare he hathe of the burghesses discontentment, wilbe the losse 
of the towne ; and therfore he craveth 1,200 souldiers more to be sente him, 
and store of munition ; then he saieth he shalbe able to bridle the burghesses. 
It is feared the Duke De Mayne will seeke to putt into the towne some 
supply, which the King saieth he wiU prevent with stronge gardes, and 
himselfe is every seconde night with them, [without whose presence nothinge 
will bee here effected.] ^ 

3 From Cambray, Balligny the Governor their doth advertise the Kinge that 
the Duke of Parma is nowe entringe Fraunce with 7,000 foote and 3,000 
horse, and expecteth the retourne of the Duke De Mayne to joyne with him, 

' Villers dowbteth the burgers, [marginal note.] 

^ This clause is omitted in the Bodleian MS. 

» Governor of Cambray sayth that the D. is entering with 7,000 foote and 3,000 horse, [marg. note.] 



A. D. 1591.] 181 

and so resolvethe to come heither to raise this seege ; or by beseeginge some 
towne of yraportaunce on the frontiers, to divert the same ; wheruppon the 
Kinge hathe sente the Prince Contye with his army and for all his nobilHtye, 
intendinge to contynewe his seege their, and yett to geive the Duke of Parma 
battell ; but with out Englishe infanterie it is feared he will doe littell good in 
either. And the Kinge is much discontented that the 1,000 men which her 
Majestie promised to sende out of the Lowe Countreys, are not nowe, as he 
is advertised, above 500, and that the English here in campe are not above 
800.' 

My former advertisements to your Lordship of the Duke of Maynes lycen- 
cinge of the Spaniards and Wallons in Paris, is nowe in this manner altered, 
that he by pollicye did drawe them out of the towne with cullor to attempte 
some stronge place theraboutes, and carried for the better shewe some 
artillerie with them ; which, assone as they were departed the towne, he caused 
to retourne. This it is reported he did, fearinge they would become masters 
of the towne, and that he might the better wourke his will of the counsel! of 
1 6 in Paris ; of whom he hathe caused four to be executed, and displaced the 
rest for consentinge to the execution of Presedente Bresson, with others. 

That the Spaniards are departed from Paris is moste assured ; but the cause 
and manner therof is as uncertaine as may bee. 

So havinge nothinge ells to advertise your Lordship at this presente, but 
of a doubtfull reporte of the defeate of the Duke of Joyeux aboute Car- 
cassonne, pretended to be geven by Monsr. Memorancie, I moste humbly 
take my leave. 

The Campe, thirde of December, 1591. 

Your Lordship's ever to commande, 

I have receaved no letters from Henry Unton. 

your Lordship since the cominge 
of Sir Roger Williams. 

' The English not above 800. [marginal note.] 



182 [December, 



xcv. 

1591, 

3 Dec. " To the Lord Generall ; by Capten Morgan." ' 

My verie good Lord. The Kinge has written to your Lordship at large, 
which I wished him to doe, and hath commanded his Ambassador to attende 
uppon your Lordship before he have audience of her Majestic, to be directed by 
your Lordship as to his beste sorte for his negotiatinge with her Majestic. He 
sendeth for more munition and money. In the laste I have discouraged him ; 
and without ^ the two former, he saieth he is never able to prevaile in this 
seege, nor in battaile againste the Duke of Parma, and therfore cravethe your 
Lordships assistance accordinge to promise ; uppon whom, nexte to her 
Majestic, he relieth. 

The Duke of Parma is entringe Fraunce, but with 73OOO foote and 3,000 
horse, as the Kinge is advertised ; and expecteth only the arryvinge of the 
Duke of Maines forces to joyne with him. They make no doubte either to 
releive this seege, or to diverte the same by some entringe uppon the frontiers ; 
which the Kinge saieth he will prevent ; and expecteth daiely the cominge of 
the Prince Conty with all his armye hether and all his nobillitie to give the 
Duke of Parma battile ; but without Englishe infanterie he is fearfull to 
attempte any thinge. 

Wee longe heare greately to understand some good newes from your Lord- 
ship ; and your Lordship shall faile of no advertisements hence as matters fall 
out worthie your Lordships knowledge. 

The Prince Anhalt and the Kinge are agreed for one monethes paie to be 
paied presentely, and an other like paie in Januarye ; wherof we are all verie 
gladd. 

Of our approaches here, your Lordship I knowe is sufficiently advertised 
from yours, who understande them better then my seLfe ; littell is donne since 
your absence, and thinges goe rather backward then forwarde, as the Catho- 
Hckes woulde have it, who feare the Kinges over much greatnes if he should 
take this towne. 

The Kinge is advertised that in the eyght Enghshe companies appointed 

' A contemporaneous copy is found in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 16. 
' Here commences the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1591.] 183 

for him out of the Lowe Countreys, ther are not above 500 souldiers, and in 
your Lordships quarter not above 400 stronge. They dayhe die therof, wher- 
fore if your Lordship procure not more men, nothinge wilbe here effected. 

Of all other matters your Lordship shalbe sufficiently advertised by the 
Kings letters to your selfe and to his Ambassador ; wherfore I moste humblie 
take my leave, with offer of my poore service unfainedly to your Lordships 
will and pleasure. 

The Campe, in haste, beinge wearied with a longe dispatch, this 3rd of 
December, 1591. 

Your Lordship's moste assured to commande, 
Henry Unton. 



XCVI. 

" From her Majestic to the Prince of Anhalte." ' 

Mon Cousin, nous avons receu votre lettre escripte en Camp devant Rouen, 
le 24"^ du moys passe, par laquelle vous faictcs amplement narration comme, 
ayant trouve audict lieu nostre Ambassadeur, luy auries communique au long 
lestat de vos affaires, et comme il vous auroit rendu de par notre deux lettres 
de diverses dates lesquelles vous auroient grandement contristees vous a])- 
portant les nouvelles du decez du feu EUecteur de Saxe, votre Cousin et 
Maistre. II y a aussj', (ce que mesme nostre Ambassadeur nous a aduertv,) 
que les troupes qu'avez conduictes d'AUemaigne, ne se trouvoyent point 
contentes de ce qu'on leur avoit mancque des payements promis par le Roy, 
dont nous somes bien forte marye, et avons come aultrefois mande nostre 
diet Ambassadeur d'en charger le Roy, y adjoustant de j^lus que s'il ne sem- 
ployeroit a vous ayez contenter et vos trouppes de ce quU a promis, nous 
nous deporterons du secours quaultrement aurons bonne volonte de luy con- 
tinuer nous mesmes ; que nous nous sentons touchee en nostre honneur, a cause 
que par les contributions par nous fournie en AUemaigne, et par nostre 

' A fair copy of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Call? E. viii. fol. 243. 



184 [December, 

instance et exhortation, vous ayez tant plustost vous laisse persuader a entre- 
prendre ce voyage ; a quoy nous a este respondu de la parte du Roy Tres- 
chrestien, tant de parroUe a notre Ambassadeur par de la come par rapporte 
de son Ambassadeur chez nous quil se recognoist a la verite grandement 
redeuable a vous et voz gens de ce que ayes porte si longue patience, sans 
la satisfaction quil confesse vous estre deiie, et luy oblige de la vous tenir, 
ce que aussy II a tresbonne intention d'accomplir en toute diligence a luy 
possible, ayant desia (come en ses lettres ils nous asseure sur son honneur,) 
sur le chemin une somme suffisante pour acquiter le deuxieme moys, nous 
ayant nomme en particulier le S' du Plessis, gentilhome de son conseil, et 
lequel nous scavons avoir un grand credit auprez de luy, quil diet avoir la 
charge et conduicte des diets deniers, et quil n'omettra nuls aultres moyens 
possibles pour vous donner pleine et agreable satisfaction ; adjoustant en fin, 
que sa seconde esperance gist au recouurement de la ville de Roan, laquelle 
gaignee luy fournira en abondance dequoy bailler contentement et a vous, et 
aux aultres ausquelles II est redeuable pour leur services. 

Et sur ce point il nous a semble devoir communiquer nostre opinion ; laqueUe 
est a la verite que le plus asseure moyen que pourra avoir le Roy ou esperer 
tant a vous fournir la satisfaction quil vous doibt, comme pour establir son estat 
contre les rebelles est demploir touts ses moyens et forces recouurer ladicte 
ville, dont lentreprise nous semble pour plusieurs raisons, ny de trop grande 
difl&amp;culte, ny de longue consumption de temps, et sans doubte de forte grande 
consequence pour asseurer son estat, et pour luy ministrer dequoy donner 
contentement a touts ceulx qui en sont en attentue. Car il est trescertain 
que les gens de guerre la dedans ne sont pas en grande nombre, et la mul- 
titude des habitants consistant de marchants et gens de mestier est plustost 
pour apporter dommage a la ville q'utillite ; car oultre la consumption quils 
feront des vivres, (lesquelles II est certain commencent desia a faillir,) ceste 
quallite des gens est tousjours plus prompte a sauver la vie qua combattre, et 
nous somes advertye que desia ceulx la ont commence a mutiner, demandants 
la paix, et quaulcuns seroient eschappes de la ville pour recercher la grace 
du Roy, dont nous pensons que vous mesmes estant au camp nestes igno- 
rant. 

Oultre ce quoy que les ennemys se soient vantes de la grandeur de leur 
forces, publiants le due de Parma come principall, et le Due de Mayne avec 
ses aydes des Liguers et les trouppes Italliennes, lesquelles ils ont divulge avoir 



A. D. 1591.] 185 

receu commandement du College des Cardinaulx depuis le deces du Papa, de 
persister en France. Nous vous asseurons de certaine cognoissance que 
lesdict [due] de Parma ne tient assemble, ny a mesmes moyens de mettre 
ensemble une moytie des gens, dent on a faict courir le bruict. Et quant aux 
Italiens ne doubtons quil ne vous sera manifeste devant que nos lettres vous 
pourront parvenir qu'ils sont desbandez, car nous sjavons de certain que le pape 
present tout aussy tost comme il a este assis en sa chaire, estant requis par les 
cardinaulx de la faction Espaignole d'envoyer argent aux Italiens en France, 
le refusa tout a plat; et semble qu'il ne se veuille tant ranger a la volonte 
du Roy D'Espaigne, come le defunct. 

TeUement que, pour venir a fin, voyant la faciUitie de la prise de Rouen et 
I'imbecillite des adversaires a en pouvoir destourner le seige, et en estants de 
notre part en tresgrande esperance du succes, nous prions vous, mon cousin, 
come Prince d'honneur, et les aultres coUoneUs, come gens de valleur et courage, 
que tout ainsy que la justice d'une sy bonne cause que de secourir im Roy 
Treschrestien contre des rebelles antichrestiens, et vostre zele a la religion 
ont pousez vos nobles courages a entrependre si penible voyage, que veuiUiez 
user la vertu de patience a en attendre le bon succes que Dieu bien tost donnera 
a vos trauvaidx, dont ensuivra I'establissement du Roy en son estat, I'asseurance 
de la religion, et a vous aultres honneur perpetuel avec recompense de votre 
peyne, despense, et hazard de votre vie; dequoy si I'esperance que nous avons 
ne nous estoit fort asseure en nostre opinion, ne vouldrions vous presser sy 
chauldement a persister en Tentreprise, come nous est tesmoing Celuy, lequel 
prierons mon Cousin, vous secourir de sa di\'ine puissance. 

Escript a nostre Palais de Westminster, ce 3"^ de December, 1591, et de 
nostre Reyne I'an 34'"'- 

Nonobstant ceste notre opinion desus dicte 
de la facillite du ^ecou^Tement de Rouen, la- 
quelle nous avons conceue seulement sur des 
advertisements venants dela, vous prions, mon 
Cousin, denconsiderer advisement et d'en- 
querir de la verite par les meiUeurs moyens 
que pourrez ; car sil vous parroistra par inqui- 
sition que nostre opinion ne se trouve fondee 
en certainte ou apparence probable, ne voul- 

BB 



186 [December, 

drions vous estre occasion par nostre advis de 
sejoumer plus longuement que vous ne serez 
guyde de raison ou esperance dune breifue 
rendition de la ville. 

1 This letter above written was signed and sent, but the postscript was not 
sent, but the contentes herof committed to be imparted to the Prince by our 
French Ambassador, if he should thincke that it would not hinder the action. 



XCVII. 
1591, 

4 Dec. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 19th, 

by Capten Conwey." ^ 

My Lord Ambassador. As the worlde is round, and so unstable, so be all 
accounts consequent ; and as we have ebbes and flouddes which comonly keepe 
certaine tymes, so nowe those matters of France varyinge ^ so often maketh 
us here in our actions to have our ebbs and fluddes uncertaine. The state of 
the French causes beinge heither advertised so uncerteinley, hathe of late 
moved her Majestic to and fro, conceminge the retoume of the Earle of Essex ; 
but nowe at tJiis present her Majestic is contented he shall retoume thither, 
but with this condition, that if he shall finde this matter of Roan sperable, 
then to remaine ; if otherwise, to retoume hither. And if her Majestic should 
finde the action desperate to recover the towne, she hathe a disposition also 
to revoke aU her forces ; the evente wherof muste be proved by tyme. 

As I wrote last unto you, her Majestic accepted your letters unto her, 
conteyninge your negotiation bothe with the Kinge and the Prince of Anhalte, 
verie plausible; allowinge your plaine manner of deaUinge on her behalfe, 
bothe with the Kinge and the Prince ; which thoughe the same were reported 

' This paragraph is in Burghley's handwriting, in the fair copy contained in the Cottonian MS. ; and 
it is also contained in the Bodleian transcript. Concerning this postscript, see No. XCVII. 
' The original of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 44. 
' Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1591.] 187 

by your selfe, yett I assure you the same was confirmed bothe by the Kings 
letters to the Ambassador here and by the Prince of Anhaltes letter to her 

Majestic, [by both which it appeared yowe had left, hope to 

receave anie further charges firom her Majestic.] ^ But yett the Prince by his 
letters presseth her Majesty to take the care therof, as doubtinge the Kinge 
woulde not performe his promise to them, and thereby he shoulde be forced 
to retyre his forces ; but her Majestic thought good to make him some cur- 
teous answeare, and some eameste requeste to beare patiently with the Kinge, 
with hope partely for the money that Du Plessis was to bringe, but specially 
with the hope of the recoverie of Roan; and there uppon her Majestic hathe 
commanded mee to indite a letter to that intente, which beinge readie to be 
signed, her Majestic would needs have added a postscripte of a sentence 
greately derogatinge the force of the letter, which I moved her to be forborne, 
addinge that you shoulde have comission to use that speech unto him, if you 
shoulde finde it not to be very hurtefuU to the cause, as in my opinion I doe 
conceive it could doe noe good in so doubtfull a tyme. But yett if you finde 
the Prince disposed to contynue his service uppon the hope of the recovery of 
Roan, and that yourselfe shall finde the recovery sperable, then for contenta- 
tion of her Majestic and to shewe her kindnes to the Prince, you male after- 
wards use the kinde of speache ; and to that intente, with the coppy of the 
letter which I sende you, I have added therto the sentence of the postscripte, 
which should have ben sent, if I had not diswaded her Majestic. 

The doubtes we conceive of your actions there, are grownded uppon these 
thinges foUowinge. 

Firste ; we finde the Kinge hath not money sufficient to paie the Rayters 
and Lansknights, wherby if they shall departe or shalbe corrupted [by the] 
enemie with the Indian money to revolte to the ememye, or at the least aban- 
don the Kinge, the town of Roan will recover great comforte. The enemye 
will come onwarde either by force to levye the seege, or to revoke the Kinge 
or his forces from it. 

Secondhe ; we perceive our forces maie serve for opinion and name ; but 
in truth we take it there are not lefte a nomber able to keepe a quarter, and 
the nomber that shall come from the Lowe Countreys will not be 900. 

And againe, as I perceive the Kinge hath greate wante of powder, for of 

' This clause omitted in the Bodleian MS. is supplied from the Cottonian, in which, however, it is 
slightly imperfect, the volume having been damaged by fire. 



188 [December, 

late he sente to Deepe for some, where none beinge, the ordinance of England 
and Holland was shipped to be carried by sea to Roan, which if it be not well 
conducted wilbe prevented by the enemie either at Newhaven, or uppon the 
river ; but yett there is shipped from hence foure daies past, xxv. lastes of 
powder at the charge of the Englishe marchants, havinge, as I thincke, good 
caution from the French Kinge for their satisfaction. 

A third cause of some doubte is, wherof I am sure you are not ignorante, 
that the Kings counsell, specially of them that have ben at Tours and Mantes, 
are not soundley affected to the Kinge to have him prosper in respecte of the 
cause of the Rehgion. 

Of these things you shall have better cause to judge them, then wee here 
can doe ; growndinge our selves uppon advise and conjectures. 

And nowe to ende, I am bolde to entreate you to procure for me a liste of 
the Kings forces, of all sortes, and of the principall commanders therof, and 
to knowe howe many of those forces are commanded by them of the Religion, 
and likewise to sende me a note of the personages of all estates whom the 
Kinge dothe use for his counsell for warres, and for his counsell for affaires. 

1 And so recommendinge to your Lordship a further understandinge of our 
occurentes here to the reporte of my Lord of Essex and of his companie. 

From Westminster, the 4th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships assured lovinge freinde, 

To the righte honorable, my verie W. Bubghley. 

lovinge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, Knight, 
her Majesties Ambassador' in Frannce. 



CXVIII. 
1591, 
4 Dec. " To the Lord Generall ; by John Symons." ^ 

My verie good Lord. Albeit the Kinge writeth to your Lordship of all 
things here, yett could I not but advertise you of the sudden allarum of the 

1 The conclusion of this letter, in the Museum copy is in Burghley's handwriting. 

2 A copy of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 270. 



A. D. 1591.J 189 

Duke of Parmas entrance, who was lately at La Chapelle, and marcheth, as it 
is saied, with all speed to releive this towne. If her Majestie doe not nowe 
sende Englishe forces, the Kinge will bothe forsake this seege, and not be able 
to keepe the feild ; neither of which he intendeth, if he may have 5,000 
EngUshe, and then assureth himself bothe of the towne and of the batteU, 
then the which he desirethe nothinge more. 

It pleased the Kinge yesternight to come to my lodginge at eleven of the 
clocke, where he staled more then an hower, acquaintinge me and Sir Roger 
Williams with the estate of his weake armye here, and with his resolution to 
attende the Duke of Parma before this towne ; but without Englishe he dis- 
paireth of all good. If he die, he saieth he wilbe buryed betweene an Enghsh 
man and a Swisser. He greately distrusteth his Almayne and French In- 
fanterie. Nowe your Lordship muste helpe, or ells he wilbecome a poore 
misserable Kinge. 

The Duke of Parmas armye, when it joyneth with the Duke of Maynes, 
wiU consiste of 30,000 men. Your Lordship knoweth the weaknes of the 
Kings infanterie and the state of his armye here. But you and her Majestie 
muste strengthen him for the common good ; ells shall we stiffer with him, or 
not longe after him. 

Monsr. Le Grande was cominge with this message to her Majestie, but the 
Elinge wanteth money to beare his charges, and his estate nowe requireth all 
possible expedition, wherfore he sendeth one expreslie to make diUigence, 
whose speedy retoume the Kinge earnestly desireth your Lordship to further, 
and Monsr. le Grande forgetteth nott his due commendations to your Lord- 
ship. 

St. VaUery is taken by composition, and the Duke of BouiUion beinge be- 
seeged in Estenay in Lorrayne by the Dukes forces, made a saUy, wherin he 
killed allmoste 1,000 of the enemy and forced him to quite his seege. So in 
all haste, I moste humbly take my leave. 

The Campe, this fourth of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships wholly to command, 

Henry Unton. 



190 [December, 



XCIX. 

1591, 

4 Dec, " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Symons." ^ 

It may please your Lordship to advertise her Majestic of the Duke of 
Parma his entrance into Fraunce, and late beinge at La Chapelle,^ not farr 
from St. Quintine, where a comptroller of the Kings house here was present ; 
when La Motte Governor of Graelin ; and Monsr. de Rosne Marshall of the 
Duke de Maines campe,^ did quarter the Duke of Parmas army the day of 
the saied comptrollers departure, which was the last of November. Also the 
castell and towne of La Fere have receaved 400 Spaniards into their garrison,* 
a place of greate strength and importance uppon the frontiers, which the Duke 
of Parma required before his entrey, and intendeth so to possesse him selfe 
of other townes in Pycardie for the Kinge of Spaine, that he male have the 
better entrie and more safe entrance for the Spanishe forces herafter. 

Assoone as the Kinge receaved this advertisement, it pleased him to come 
to my lodginge with Secretarie Revol, and Monsr. de Reaux, where he staled 
more then an hower, at eleven of the clocke at nighte, havinge conferred vnth 
the Marshall Byron and other of the counsell aboute the state of his armye 
before his cominge to me, which it pleased him to imparte to me, and also 
acquainted me with this intended resolution to attende the Duke of Parma 
before this towne, and not to quite this seege, but to give him batteU here if 
he come heither to levye the same, as the Kinge is advertised he resolveth to 
doe with all dilUgence. 

The Kinge is much perplexed for the weake state of his army here, for his 
Swisses he saieth are not above 2,500, his Lansquenetts but 3,000 able men, 
his Frenche here 3,000 and the Enghshe not 400 stronge.^ Some more 
French he expecteth at the cominge of the Prince Conty and others, to the 

' The original letter, with marginal notes, is preserved in the State Paper Office. In the Cottonian 
MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 585, is the draft. 

' The D. of Parma at La Chapelle by S. Quintin. [marginal note.] 

' La Mote quartered his army, [marginal note.] 

* 400 Sp. at la Faire. [marginal note.] 

' The Infantry, 2500 Swisses, 3000 lansq., 3000 Fr., 8500. [marginal note.] 



A. D. 1591.J 191 

number of 3,000 ; and this is all the infanterie he hathe here, or can make, as 
he informeth me, wher with he saieth he is neither able to geive the Duke of 
Parma battell, whose army joyninge with the Duke of Maines will consist of 
30,000 horse and foote,' nor keepe good the seege here. 

Thus much he requested me with all speede to advertise her Majestic, and saied 
he would bothe write and sende expreslie to her Majestic him selfe to crave 
her renforcinge of her former forces of 4,000, and to make them in all 5,000 ; 
otherwise he saieth he expecteth nothinge but his utter mine and overthrowe, 
and shalbe forced to leave the field, or ells to fight with the losse of honor and 
lief. But if her Majestic shall vouchsaflFe to sende him so manie as male make 
upp the compleate number of 5,000, he saieth he doubteth not to carry awaie 
this towne in the enemies face, and by battaile to defeate him and his forces, 
beinge stronger then he, the Duke of Parma, is in horse.^ 

Monsr. Le Grand was once commanded by the Kinge to goe with this mes- 
sage to her Majestic, and with these his requests ; and after the Kinge resolved 
to send one that might make more expidition, imderstandinge that within 15 
dayes the Duke of Parma intendeth to releive this seege. 

I am verie sorry that the King's necessities prove so burthensome to her 
Majestic, and his requestes so endlessc ; and it is no smalc discomforte to me 
to advertise such unpleasinge things and to yeald such crabbed fniites of my 
service here ; but the occasioncs are so extraordinary, and the Kings necessi- 
ties so ordinary, as your Lordship cannott expect better firom hence; and 
I leave unto your Lordship to judge by the consideration of the state of 
things, as well att home as abroade, what is fitt for her Majestic to doe herein ; 
beinge without the compasse of my caUinge and understandinge to geive ad- 
vise what is meete in such waighty matters. For he that is in my place can 
but beholde the outwarde barke of thinges abroade, and rather ghesse then 
understande her Majesties state at home ; wherfore I will spare to discover 
my follye therin, and expect such resolution and answeare as shall beste 
please her Majestic, which 1 beseech your Lordship to further in respcctc the 
tyme and occasions doe so greately require the same. 

The Kinge is greately troubled in mynde with this certeine and sudden 
alarum of the Duke of Parmas entrie and resolution to levye this seege j and 
I proteste to your Lordship, the French doe generally tremble at this newes, 

' The D. of Parma 30,000 hors and foot demands 5000 men. [marginal note.] 

' The K. accounteth him self stronger in hors then the D. of Parma, [marginal note.] 



192 [December, 

and bothe Catholickes and Protestants doe nowe crye out for her Majesties 
ayde, and confesseth their diffidence of the French and Almayn infantrie. 
Moreover the Kinge protesteth that if he die in this battaile, he wilbe buried 
betweene an Englishman and a Swisser. 

The towne and castell of St. Vallerye are taken with out battery, uppon 
shewe only of the cannon ; it is a place of greate importance, the rather for 
the late takinge of Rue, and will annoy the enemy greatly, and releive them of 
Corbei verie much, beinge uppon the mouth of the ryver of Some. 

Monsr. de Nevers i is sente for with all speed to take sufficient forces with 
him, and to make head to the Duke of Parma aboute Compaigne and in Py- 
cardie, with the ayde of Monsr. Longeville, and other forces there ; but it is 
feared he wiU refuse that charge and so disapointe the Kinge. 

The Duke de Mayne is gonne to joyne with the Duke of Parmas forces, 
and hathe promised within 15 dales to be before Roan and to force the Kinge 
to leave his seege. But the Kinge hasteneth to the takinge of Mounte St. 
Catherine, wherin he maketh noe doubte shortelie to prevaile. Soe in verie 
greate haste I moste humbUe take my leave. 

The Campe, this 4th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 



1591, 

5 Dec. " From the Lord Threasurer; receaved the 19th, 

by Capten Conwey." 

Sir, after I had closed upp my letters, her Majestic renewed her former 
mislikinge that the French Kinge had made some of your companie Knightes, 
and willeth you that in no wise you shall suffer anie to be made knightes that are 
her naturall subjectes, and in like manner she hath stricktlie charged my 

» Mons. de Nevers to be sent to the enpountring of the Duke of Parma, if he wyll go. [mar. note.] 



A. D. 1591.] 193 

Lorde of Essex to make no more, for that he hath broken her expresse com- 
andement in his instructions for makinge such a nomber as he did, whom shee 
[holds] not lawful! untiU she shall make choise of the wourthiest, and them to 
make knights her selfe. 

From Westminster, the 5th of December, 1591. 



'3 



Your loyinge freinde 

moste assured, 

To the right honorable my verie Will. Burghley. 

lovinge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassador 
in Fraunce. 



CI. 

1591, 

6 Dec. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 19th, by 

Capten Conwey." i 

My Lord Ambassador, I receaved yestemighte your letters of the 26th of 
the last moneth, by Sir Christopher Lyttcott ; ^ which beinge imparted unto 
her Majestic, she resolved notwithstandinge my former letters by her former 
letters ^ to affirme that I have donne, and that with more asseveration of her 
Majesties setled purpose not to be at any further charges, which her Ma- 
jestic dothe so plainely expresse by her owne letters as I neede not reitterate 
the same. And yet I am moste sorry to see the decayed estate of the Kinge, 
not to be able to make upp one monethes pay at this tyme, and on the other 
side knowinge howe much her Majestic is so daiely charged with these for- 
raine warres, as the wourld may see it to our discredit, bothe by sellinge of her 
owne lande and by borrowinge of greate somes of money ; which beinge by 
you secretly comunicated with the Kinge, he ought to have more respecte of 

' The original letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 202. 

3 See No. LXXXVII. 

^ This portion of the original letter is burned. 

C C 



194 [December, 

her Majestic then thus still to presse her againste her mynde to yeald more 
then is convenient for her estate ; which, as you are not ignorante, muste be 
mightely defended this nexte sommer againste the Kinge of Spaines forces, 
which are not only to come out of Spaine after their accustomed manner, but 
also by the preparation of forces of shipps that he hathe made of greate 
strength, out of the moste parte of the marrytime townes of Eastlands, and 
those dirrectly to come thence to invade the realrae uppon the east partes 
thereof. 

By your last letters I perceive you have not understoode of the greate losse 
that you have by the deathe of your singular good patrone here, which hap- 
pened uppon the 20th of the laste moneth, to the greate greife firste of her 
Majestic and nexte of all other his compagnons and freinds ; but hcrof I will 
leave to write, knowinge howc soure it wilbe to renewe any mention therof to 
you ; and yet neither you nor anie other mustc rcpyne againste the ordinaunce 
of God. 

Before this letter shall come to you I knowe my Lord of Essex wilbe there, 
whose goinge and not goinge hathe ben in divers ballanccs here, her Majestic 
mislikinge it bothe for the danger he mightc likely incurre, and for the smale 
numbers that shalbe ther of our nation for him to comande, which her Ma- 
jestic thought might have been commanded by a meaner person ; but yett 
when we could not devise of anie such fitt for the purpose, specially to reduce 
the number into stronger bands, and by cassinge of sundrey persons or cap- 
tens lackinge their numbers ; and so he hath instructions specially, and her 
Majestic yealded to send him for that purpose, and also to retourne with out 
longer tarryinge there then it should be found that the recovery of Roan 
shalbe sperable within some reasonable tyme. We have daily intelligence of 
the Spanishe Armados losse, more then was reported in the booke which I 
sente you. 

From the Corte at White Hall, this 6th of lOber, 1591. 

Your verie lovinge frcinde, 

To the right honorable my verie W. Burghley. 

lovinge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassador 
in France. 



A. D. 1591. 195 



CII. 



1591, 

6 Dec. " From Her Majestic; receaved the 19th, by 

Capten Conway." i 

ELIZABETH R. 

Right trustie and well beloved, we greete you well. Althoughe we have 
sent to you of late our letters directed to the Prince of Anhalt, in answere of his 
to us dated the 24th of the laste moneth, wherof also the coppy hathe ben 
sente to you; whereby and by other letters sente to you also by our lord 
Threasurer of England uppon our commandment, you male perceive we have 
no intention to be at any further charge to releive either the saied Prince, or 
the French Kinge for him, with any more money ; — yett because wee see by 
your laste letters sent by Lydcotte to our Threasurer ^ that the Prince is not 
satisfyed with the some oflFered to him by the Kinge, amountinge not to a 
full monethes pay, where there are three monethes dewe, and therfore the 
Prince had a purpose to come over hither to us to have obtayned from us a 
supplement in money for his paie, beinge only letted by a mishapp of a hurte 
in his foote, wherof beinge recovered it seemeth he would come hither for the 
saied purpose. 

Althoughe we did of late advertise you by our saied Threasurer by sundrey 
his letters that we woulde in no wise, nether by the French Kings solicita- 
tions, nor by the Prince, nor for any other respecte, yeald to pay any further 
sommes of money then wee have donne ; wee have thought good by theise our 
letters expressely to lett you knowe that whatsoever meanes shalbe used by 
the French Kinge, or by the Prince and his collonells, to seeke to have from 
us any money, or otherwise, by gevinge our bondes or creditt to any other for 
that purpose, you shall expressely answere them that we meane not to yealde 
thereto, addinge that our charges alreadey susteyned bothe in Germany, and 
with maintenance and contynuance in paie the numbers that have bene sente 
from us firste into Bryttanie, and nowe in Normandie, are such, as if the 

' The original draft, all in Burghley's handwriting, is preserved in the State Paper Office. The 
original letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 241. 
-' See No. LXXXVII. 



196 [December, 

chardges therof were duly considered, he should see cause rather daylie to 
thancke us, then still to demande of us further supply of men, as he hathe 
lately doen, wherunto we have agreed, and not to contynewe nowe further 
demandes of money; or inderectlyby sendinge over of the Prince to presse us 
there unto. 

Therfore to conclude, we wUl and charge you not only not to geive them 
any hope therof, but with good reasons to diswade them from requiringe 
therof; and to that ende we would have you, if you shall perceave the Prince 
to contynewe his purpose to come heither with any intention to require of us 
further aide, you maie disswade him from that purpose, with assurance that 
we mynde not to be any waies iurther charged ; lettinge him to knowe at howe 
greate charges we have ben with that Kinge, not onely from the firste cominge 
of him to his crowne, but for many yeares afore, when with out our helpe he 
had not by any worldhe apparance bene hable to have staled to have come to 
this crowne of France. 

You maie also in tyme convenient lett the French Kinge understande that 
we have founde by former experience that our greate charges past have so 
smallie profited him, as they have ben used, that we ar in small hope of any 
that hereafter shalbe expended for him shall any more profite him then 
before. 

Given under our signet, at our Pallace at Westminster, the 6th of Decem- 
ber, 1591, of our raigne the 34th yeare. 

To our trustie and well beloved. Sir 
Henry Unton, knight, our Ambassador 
resident with the French Kinge. 



cm. 

1591, 

6 Dec. "From Sir Robert Cecyll; receaved the 19th by 

Capten Conway." * 

Su-, By this tyme you have receaved my other letters, whereby you maie 
perceave that I am not negligent as I am not curious. 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 3. 



A. D. 1591.J 197 

Your deallinge with the Prince, as in all other thinges, the Queene Hketh 
and verie well alloweth, onely your knights ' shee is offended with ; wherin 
you are no more unfortunate then he whom she highest favoreth. 

For your coming, foUowe your own judgment ; marry, till I heare it from 
you, my judgment teacheth me to thincke it not convenient thus to be brewted 
and carried, as those doe that speake of it. To desire to come, my lord Chan- 
cellor beinge sicke, for a tyme, were honorable ; but to desier (that beinge at 
an ende, as nowe it is,) to come over, beinge an Ambassadore leiger, men 
thincke should not altogther be agreeable with your profession, whose fortune 
dependes not uppon any subjectes life, but uppon her Majesties. Beleive me, 
Sir, there are manie conjectures made of it, and such as I am sure you are 
not gyltie of; lett me knowe therfore what I shall doe, or if you will not 
have me doe any thinge, I wiU stay or proceede as you directe me. Some saie 
you muste come over because your debtes nowe shalbe discovered ; for ells 
was it never seene that an Ambassador leiger would sue to come over, not 
beinge sicke, within 4 monethes tarryinge there, and nowe before the tyme of 
a seege, when you see my lord GeneraU leaves all fortune to see the end of it. 
This discorse growes by many fidlers in your cause. I tolde Sir Christopher 
Lyttcott of yt, and wished him to forbeare to presse yt tyU you did write, and 
then shall my purposes and endeavors tende only to your satisfaction, whose 
creditt and reputation, as it is deare ever to you, so lett it be nowe raoste 
tenderly looked unto, for men in action are on stages. 

And thus for matter of state, I leave all to your letters which you receave 
by this bearer ; assuringe you that my love shall never have end, if it be in 
my power to make you know or feale it. 

From the Corte, the sixte of December, 1591. 

Your lovinge freinde. 

To the right honorable my verie Ro : Cecyll. 

lovinge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassador 
with the French Kinge. 

' See the Postscript to No. LXXIV. 



198 [December, 



CIV. 

1591, 

9 Dec. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Deryke." ^ 

May it please your Lordship to understand that the Kinge did sende for 
me this morninge to the cort, and acquainted me with his advertisements of 
the Duke of Parma's beinge at Guise the 6th of this monethe, wher a messenger 
of the Kings did there see him, and passing by La Fere did there finde the 
Prince of Parmas sonne with his whole armye, who was accompanied with the 
Duke de Maine and his forces, and expected dayhe the Duke of Parma thear, 
havinge sente his sonne before with the conducte of his armye to La Fere to 
attende his cominge ; so that all their forces being joyned doe make the armye 
neare 30,000 stronge, wherof the infantery consisteth of 23,000, and the 
cavallere 5,000 stronge. Wherfore the Kinge dothe nowe by his letters to 
her Majestie earnestlie sollicit his former requestefor 5,000 Englishe, and paie 
for them but for sixe weekes ; hopinge assuredly by that tyme, with her 
Majesties saied ayde, to carrie away Roan. Herof he required me to advertise 
her Majestie and by my letters to procure all possible diUigence; because he 
saieth the Duke of Parma marcheth heitherwardes and resolveth to be here 
within 15 daies, which is very Ukely, if he intende rather to rayse this seege by 
force then to diverte it. The consideration of this necessarie aide I leave to 
her Majesties gratious pleasure and your Lordships grave advise, who can 
sufficiently forejudge the sequeU of our actions here if the Kinge shoulde be 
abandoned, and not releived ; he beinge greately awakened and amazed with 
these aUanims of the Duke of Parma, and the only hope of him and his 
restinge uppon her Majesties favor. Also he ofFerethe anie manner of assur- 
ance for her Majesties somes of money disbursed, or to be disbursed, which 
are not sufEciently provided for by the former accord, wherof I made a motion 
to him, if her Majestie were pleased to yeald to his demands. 

Uppon some feare the Kinge conceaveth of the Governor of Gisors loyaltie, 
he is this daie gone theither to displace him, and to settle the Marques 
D'Allegre in his goverment there, and resolveth to retourne to the campe 

' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1591.J 199 

within two or three daies. The Duke of Nevers cannott go to Compeigne 
with his Almayn forces, accordinge to the Kings former directions, for that 
they will not march without presente paie, so the Kinge is forced to make all 
provission for their satisfaction. In the meane season for wante of money his 
service is neglected, and more ready to receave the Duke of Parma in Picar- 
die to make hedd to him, wherwith the Kinge is highely discontented. 

Monsr. le Marquis de Villars, sonne to the Duchesse De Maine, accompa- 
nied with 900 foote and 700 horse, was defeated in Perrigorte by the Duke of 
Vantadour, Governor for the Kinge in Lymosyn, and Monsr. de La Force, 
and the Vicounte of Abyterre were with him with others. The Marquis loste 
all his ensignes, moste of his men, two peices of artillere, and was forced to 
flye, to the casteU of St. Drogett in Perrigort, where he is also invested and 
cannott escape. 

Dy verse of the Spaniards and Wallons of the garrison in Paris are retoumed 
from the Duke de Mayne to their garrison againe, beinge quartered in severaU 
partes of the towne, and not together; and the Duke de Mayne hath carried 
away many of them with him, and placed 900 Lorraines and Frenche aboute 
the Bastile and places of greatest strengthe and importance ; whereby we 
gather here this greate diffedence of the Spanishe forces. 

By letters from Rome it is confirmed that Cardinall Santiquatro is made 
Pope without resistance, and uppon the suddaine, of purpose to hinder the 
Spanishe practises. He is a Mylanese by birth but a Bollognese of verie base 
parentage, and as it is thought a porters sonne, and therfore called Fatchinetto 
of Fachino, which signifiethe a porter. He was some tymes an advocate, and 
only advanced by the late Cardinall Farnese ; afterwards he was ymployed as 
a factor in Rome for the Kinge of Spaines affaires ; and yett, as it is affirmed, 
chosen nowe by the Florentine faction ; yett, as your Lordship knoweth, the 
Cardinall Farnese was ever mortall enemy to the Florentines. Greate hope 
is conceived he wilbe no Leaguer nor prodigall of St. Peters treasure, wherof 
the greatest parte was consumed by his predecessors, which he misliketh. He 
is of good judgment and discreation ; cold and temperatt, but verie sicklei. 

The last Pope dyed moste miserabhe, beinge consumed with lyce and 
wourmes ; and in his sicknes none could endure to be with him, he was so 
unsavorie. His deathe in this manner causeth many to note the judgments 
of God, and to speake strangely of him. 

From Spaine is advertismente that the Kinge of Spaine is very sicke of a 



200 [December, 

feaver and of the paine in his throate, whose deathe would finishe the misse- 
ries of Christiendome and is greately feared by the Leaguers. And so beinge 
forced to make an overhastie dispatch, by reason of these sudden allarums of 
the Duke of Parma, I moste humbly take my leave. 
From the Campe, the 9th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships to commande, 

I have receaved no letters from Henby Unton. 

your Lordship in answeare of myne 
or otherwise, since the 11th of No- 
vember. 



CV. 

1591, 

9 Dec. " To the Lord Generall ; by Dericke." 

Your Lordship male perceive by the Kings often sendinge to you, that I 
forgett not to soUicett him, as your Lordship willed me; wherin your Lord- 
ship male perceive my wiUingnes to serve you, and wishinge my service maie 
stand you in greater matter. The allarum of the Prince of Parma is very 
hott, who was on Munday last at Guise, and his sonne with his forces attend- 
inge him at La Fere, with Monsr. de Maine and his forces ; now it resteth in 
your Lordship to procure a soddaine resolutione and ayde from her Majestie ; 
for within fifteene dales we expecte the enemy here aboutes, and the Kinge 
marveileth much he heareth not from your Lordship. This day the Kinge 
is gone to Gisors to remove the Governor thence and to place the Marquis 
of AUaigne in his goverment. He returneth againe within two or three 
dales. 

The overthrowe of the Marquis of Villars, sonne to the Dutchesse of Maine, 
was verie base, and is confirmed ; wherin 900 foote and 700 horse were 
defeated, all his ensignes taken, and two pieces of artillerie, him selfe forced 
to flye to the castell of St. Drogett, wher he is also invested, and cannott 
escape. 



A. D. 1591.] 201 

I have been hastened by the Kinge to sende away my dispatch, wherin I 
have written eamestley, but your Lordship must onely geive lief to all. So 
in all poste haste, refeninge your Lordship to the Kings owne letters to your 
selfe, which I sende by this bearrer in the Ambassadors pacquett, I humbUe 
take my leave. 

From the Campe, this 9th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 
Henry Untox. 



CVL 

1591, 

10 Dec. " Againe to the Lord Threasurer ; by Deryke." ' 

My verie good Lord. This messenger beinge ready to departe with my 
former dispatch, was staled uppon the Marshall Byrons cominge to me with 
letters from the Kinge, which were lately intercepted, written from the Duke 
of Mayne, the 7th ^ and 8th day of theyr December, to the Duke of Parma, the 
Prince Ascoley, and the Duke of Monte Martiano, Monsr. De la Chastre, 
Monsr. De Rosne, Marshall of his Campe, and De Portes, his Secretarie, or 
rather for the League ; uppon the sight wherof I requested the Marshall the 
orriginalls therof might be sente to her Majestie, wherunto he was unwillinge, 
alleaginge they ought to be reteyned, and coppies might suffice to be sent, 
beinge examined firste by me, not withstandinge I prevailed in the ende for 
the originalls, which are sente accordinglie ; holdiage it necessary to sende 
them for her Majesties better satisfaction. By the dates and contentes wherof, 
your Lordship male perceive the Duke of Maines instance for the Duke of 
Parmas dihgence to releive this towne of Roan, before the Kinges forces 
assemble together, and the haste he maketh to joyne with him and his forces. 
And by them your Lordship male also perceive his late feare of Paris, and by 

' The original of this letter is found in the State Paper Office ; the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 
587, contains the draft. 
" Here begins the Cottonian draft. 

D D 



202 [December, 

his privatt letters some doubtes and jallousie he conceiveth of the receavinge 
of Spanishe forces into La Fere, albeit he nameth them not. It is needlesse 
further to discourse of the contents of the saied letters, and will therefore 
leave you to be informed by the letters themselfes. 

By other advertisements sente nowe also to the Kinge, it appeareth that the 
Duke de Mayne hath joyned with him, and was at the last messengers depar- 
ture at Laon in Pycardie, neare Compeigne ; and the Duke of Parma and his 
forces lodged about Ham, and other places alonge the river of Some, drawinge 
heitherwardes ; so the Kinge feareth their levyinge of the seege before her 
Majesties ayde come, unlesse you procure the greater favor and expedition. 
Howe much this newes doeth trouble manie here, your Lordship maie guesse 
by the ymportance therof, and by the former letters. The Kinge moste ear- 
nestly beseecheth her Majestie nowe to regarde him and his estate, or never, 
and importuneth me to send almoste every howre. 

The Counts Gramont, a Leaguer, is here come from the Duke of Mayne 
underhand to purchase a generaU peace, wherunto the Kinge is greatly in- 
clyned, so the Kinge of Spaine maie be excluded, wherof he is putt in hope. 
Villeroy also cometh to treate therof, and hath his pasporte signed by the 
Kinge, whose cominge is shortely expected. Also Ballagnyes wief of Cambray ' 
cometh to the same purpose, employed by her husband, who endevereth 
to do all good offices againste the Spaniards. It pleased the King to acquainte 
me him selfe with this treatie of peace, uppon my castinge out some speech 
therof; and he saied he doubted not but her Majestie would like therof, which 
I also affirmed. So in all haste, I humbly take my leave and end with my 
paper. 

The Campe, this 10th of December, 1591. 

Yours Lordships to command, 
Henry Unton. 



1 Jean de Montluc, seigneur de Balagny, Prince of Cambray ; his wife was Renee de Clermont 
d'Amboise. 



A. D. 1591.J 203 



CVII. 

1591, 

12 Dec. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved by- 

John Symons, the 18th." 

My Lord Ambassador. I make accompte at this tyme that my Lord of 
Essex, my Lord Generall, is arryved at the Campe, for that he landed at 
Deepe uppon Frydai laste, and so did also our companies of the Lowe Coun- 
tries ; and I wishe that I have hearde at this present (by a reporte from Dover, 
brought theither from Deepe,) that the French Kinge had wonne Mounte St. 
Katherine, were as true as I conceave the arrivall of the saied Earle ; which 
if it be trewe, no meanes will keepe it longe from us, but forcible contrary 
wynde. 

Your laste letters reportinge the conference had there with you in the campe 
by the French Kinge, and Sir Roger Williams beinge present, hath ben some- 
what unpleasant unto her Majestie, thoughe she findeth noe faulte therein in 
you, for the whole contentes of the negotiation hath ben expressed at verie 
greate lengthe by the Kinges letters unto her Majestie, and also unto his 
Ambassador here, who hath delivered the same to her ; and after the same 
well weighed by her, shee hathe made answeare by writinge in a letter of 
some lengthe, ' the coppy wherof I do sende you, and therfore meane to make 
noe recitall, but am by her Majesties commandement to require you to deliver 
it to the Kinge. And thoughe you shall not use any speech to him in her 
Majesties name, as it were to participate the contentes of the letters, yet you 
maie breifely after the dehvery therof, and the Kings perusall, sale that you are 
verie sorrie that the tyme bothe on his parte and the Queenes be so unreason- 
able as neither her Majestie can yealde to his demands, nor he obtaine that 
wherof he hathe neede. And yett to deale plainely with you, her Majestie 
hathe greate cause to suspecte that the reporte of the Kings weaknes of his 
forces there by particular denomination of all sortes, bothe French and 
strangers, is treble to the nomber of the Kinges allegation of verie footmen. 

And as to that pointe that the Kinge makes doubte of the levyinge of the 

1 See No. LXXXII. 



204 [December, 

seege to fighte with the Duke of Parma, is not yett in person come from 
Brussels, neither are his forces with the Duke of Mayne, Lorrayne, and the 
Italians, so greate hy a thirde parte as the Kings comptrollers reporte was ; and 
it may be the Duke of Parma will not be able to bringe his army so farr as 
Roan for lacke of victualles, consideringe he is to come throughe a countrey 
already spoiled and harried by the Reisters. And besides this, if St. Cathe- 
rines should be wone before the Duke can come neare with his army, the 
towne of Roan male be with small nombers blocked upp, and the Kinge have 
sufficient forces to withstande the Duke of Parmas assayling when he shall 
have comen so many miles to encounter with the French Kinge. 

These and such like suppositions, not altogether improbable, have moved her 
Majestic to thincke the perill of the Kinge not so greate as he hathe pretended, 
which also I wishe to be trewe. But howsoever it is, in truthe the tyme is 
not proper to levye newe nombers in Englande at this tyme of the yeare, spe- 
cially to be transported by sea, and impossible to be sent theither in tyme ; 
for that if the Kinge Wynne not Roan before two monethes, there is noe hope 
to gaine it for many respectes. 

Her Majestic sendeth Sir Thomas Leighton thether of speciall truste to 
advise the Earle in his actions ; and hathe commanded the Earle by her owne 
letters, that if the Kinge shoulde departe from Roan to goe to fight with the 
Duke of Parma, the Earle should not goe with him by any perswation. 

By one of your letters you seeme not to have receaved anie of my letters 
since Sir Roger Williams beinge theire, which to me is verie strange, consider- 
inge howe often I have written to you since that tyme ; and as I hope, if they 
have not miscarried, you shall finde it otherwise. 

I wishe you could come to understande of the truthe of all the Kings forces, 
wherunto I cannott prescribe you howe to attayne, but by there quarteringe 
and incampeinge. I thincke it moste easie to be knowen by some men of 
judgement, that might peruse the same. 

And thus havinge no other thinge at this presente, I wishe and hope 
shortely to heare some good newes of the forte of St. Catherines, wherof I 
make such accompte as the olde proverbe is dimidium plus Mo. 

From the Corte at Whitehall, the 12th of December, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freinde. 
To my honorable good friende, Sir William Burgley. 



A. D. 1591.] 205 

Henry Unton, Knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador resident with the French 
Kinge. 



CVIII. 
1591, 

12 Dec. "■ From her Majestic to the French Kinge; written with her 
owne hande, and receaved by John Symons.'' ' 

Monsieur mon frere, ce a este tousjours I'advis des sages, qu'on se governe 
si bien a lendroict de leur amys, que plus hardiment ils sen pourront ^ asseurer 
au besoinge ; car pour les accabler au lieu de les maintenir, cest pour en 
mancquer, quand ils en doibvent user; de quoy me souvenant, je trouve bien 
estrange les derniers lettres que vous me mandes ; esquelles je vois que vous 
ne tenes plus de mesure en m'augraentant les frais, et danger des vies, de mes 
subjectes ; que ne gardastes consideration respecter vos plusieurs promesses et 
peu d'accomplishments, ce que me semble indigne de tant d'honneur, respect, 
despens, et effusion de sang, que, pour vous complaire, jay foumy pour votre 
endroict ; il ne vous souvient, U me semble, que mes subjectes a bonne raison 
sortout pour attendre de mes mains plus naif amour, plus de royall soing, que 
tousjours les consumer en geuere pour aultruy, dont nous nattendons qu' 
incertain paiement, et asseure nuUe parte victorie pour nous, ny augmentation 
d'une province, ville, haure, ny lieu asseure pour notre retraict, ny aultre 
chose, que vault I'hazard de nous affoiblir les forces, qui nous porroient servir 
en temps contre nos propres enemies : amis faisons une farce a my jour, a tels 
qui nous voyent, pour laultruy grandeur, laisser moins de force a nous mesmes ; 
pour ce je conclua, contynaant en mesme sorte, que tousjours jay accustume, 
pour ne vous decevoir par vaine opinion, que mon traictement nestant de 
milleure sorte ; que tousjours jay accoustume pour ne vous decevoir par vaine 
opinion, que mon traictement n'estant de miUeure sorte que du comencement 
de vos plus grandes necessites U. a este, ou ne mes ad vis onques receurent 
fruict avis permission a tout temps de oultre courir vos plus expedientes 

' A copy of this letter is contained in the Cottonian ilS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 245. 
■" Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



206 [December, 

occasions, ny mes sy fortifies quen pre nostre profitt, ny moy honneur. Et 
que cest' heure sy je fasse mal advisee mes gens arryveroient un moys ou deux 
apres le marche ; vous me pardonners de plus aggravir mes subjectes ny plus 
affoiblier mes cofres. J appendray une meilleure lecon que de perdre pour 
compagnie : sy par faulte de preuoyance on se vault perdre. Et combien 
quil vous plaise de figuier vostre estat sy perileux,'je me console en aultre 
facon, faisant mon comte pour ne me monStrer peu challant de votre grandeur, 
quelque mal conception quen pourries avoir, que rne souuenant du penner 
instant que demandastes mes forces vous les requerastes tant plustost pour 
pourvoir prendre Roen, prenier que les Allemans y venoyent, ne pensant pour 
vous enservier en ce lieu la, avis pour defendre lentree du Due de Parma, ou 
les gens du Pape, et me fistes a croire quauries plus de vingt mil oultre les 
miens. Et Roger Williams m'asseura quauries avec mes troupes plus de 
quarante mil hommes a Roan, oultre tells qui demeuroient es aultres provinces 
pour vous defendre de quelques estrangers. Tout cecy ramasse me fist 
esperer meilleure sequence de vos actions, que dattendre (ce que Dieu ne 
vueiUe) que fistes levee mal honorable et nullement asseuree. Si fussies en 
si mal fortune estat, il me semble, soubs votre pardon, que pourries mander 
aux estats, qui ont leur armee toute preste, et qui ne seront sy loing a venir 
que les miens non encore ramasses. Et qua plus grande raison les pourries 
recercher, pour sestre sy benignement dedies a voz bonnes graces, come je 
ne suis ignorant quils se sont tousjours, et come vous mesmes le scaues mieulx 
que moy. Et pour ne vous fascher les ieux je finiray, priant le Createur vous 
inspirer de faire ce qui sera pourle mieulx, de qui je me rejouiray, come sy en 
temps vous eussies sujnii mes tres affectiones aduis, vous priant de prendre en 
bonne part ceste responce de laqueUe vous estes la cause 

Vostre bien bonne seur et cousine, 

Elizabeth R. 



CIX. 
1591, 

12 Dec. " From Sir Robert Cecyll; receaved the 18th, by 

John Symons." 

Sir, I finde you have shewed favor to a younge man for my sake. He 



A. D. 1591.] 207 

writes to me of it, and I knowe you can consider howe fair I wishe a man of 
his profession pleasured, which is in any thinge may further his service, as 
counsel], direction, and pasporte ; but other charges let him not put you to, 
for the feUowe hathe a good audacious witt, and will take enoughe uppon 
him. This service he oflFered, pretendinge much by his father's meanes, in 
the towne. I see you have conferred with him, and soe I beseeche you 
directe him, and as you see cause lett him stay or retoume, for I thincke you 
heare of diverse out of the towne every day. 

Your last letters expressinge the desperate state of the Kinge, the highnes 
of the Duke of Parmas army, and the soddaine large demande of the 5,000 
men from hence and the 30,000 crownes, makes aU here desperate, &gt; for it is 
very newe to us to thincke of such expositions ; and seinge aU is loste in vaine 
and the Kings state so weake, our hopes are growen coulde, and with dispaire 
we leave all to fortune, charitie ever beginninge of it selfe. My lord writes 
you the resolution, and therfore I will holde you no longer, but rest your 
faithfull freinde assuredlye. 

Robert Cecyll. 

12 December, 1591. 

To the right honorable my verie lovinge 
freinde. Sir Henry Unton, knight, her 
Majestie's Ambassador with the French 
Kinge. 



ex. 

1591, 

15 Dec. " From the Lord Threasurer, receaved the 23th."2 

My lord Ambassador, Althoughe I am sure by the seighte of my late letters 
sente over to you, and by the letters of her Majestic to the French Kinge, 
you have well understoode how much her Majestic misUked' to yealde to the 

&gt; See No. CIV. 

- The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 204. 

^ Here begins the Cottonian copy of the letter. 



208 [December, 

Kings requeste ; so as if the same had comen unto you before your last letters, 
written of the 9th and 10th of this moneth,i you would not have by your 
owne letters renewed the Kings requeste ; and therfore though her Majestie 
hath at this present ben much oifended towards you with those your laste 
letters of the 9th and 10th, by which you have, as her Majestie conceaveth, 
to earnestly recommended the cause so greately misliked for her to yeald unto, 
yett I have to the beste of my power for your excuse alleadged that if the 
former letters had ben come to you, (which could not possible be before the 
writinge of your letters,) you would have shuned to have recommended these 
demands of newe succors, and so I hope her Majestie hath ben by such my 
allegations appeased, wheras before her offence was more greivous againste you 
then I thought I could have pacified. And to mainteyne her fantacye therin, 
she saieth you are abused by the French there, and (as she gesseth also) you 
are tempted therunto to please my lord of Essex, betweene whom and the 
French Kinge she thincketh these demands are made by compacte ; and, as 
shee saieth, it agreeth with noe reason for the French Kinge to pretende that 
he looked for the Duke of Parma to come within fifteen dales, recknoninge his 
accompt from the 6th or 7th of December, to oflFer him battell afore Roan, and 
for his helpe to require by letters of the tenth of our December to have 5,000 
men Englishe to be sente over, wheras the levy of halfe the nomber coulde not 
possible be, and much lesse the transportation of them,by twentie dales after the 
fifteene. And in very treuth,it lacketh all good experience to require so sudden a 
levy to be made in winter tyme, and to be transported with suf&amp;cient furniture 
and victuells in ' so shorte a tyme out of a countrey distante beside; and much 
the harder, consideringe the greate nombers that have ben already sent, and 
almost all wasted, bothe men and furniture, for the greater parte levyed in the 
marrytine countries. And yett for my parte, I cannot deny but the necessitie 
of the French Kinge may be as greate as is alleaged ; althoughe I doubte 
whether the Duke of Parma and his armes can be either so greate or so ready 
to make so longe a march in this tyme of the yeare as to come so neare to 
Roan; for as you their in Fraunce are informed of the Dukes entrie into 
Fraunce, so we out of the Lowe Countreys have like information of his 
retourne into Bruxelles. But to conclude this my letter, I thincke you may 
doe well to use by your nexte letter to her Majestie some reasonable excuse 
for your recommendinge of those late demands of the French Kinge in sorte 
as you have donne. 

' See Nos. CIV. and CVI. 



* 



A. D. 1591.J 209 

I am verie sorry to see the defectes of our Captaines with their bandes that 
are come out of the Lowe Countreys to be soe defective in their numbers ; for 
trewe it is that order was given to send from thence seven companies, wherof 
one was intended of 200 to have made up a full 1,000, besides the dead paies ; 
but nowe I perceive uppon there landinge at Deepe there are but 630. Al- 
thoughe the men be stronge, if the tyme of the Kings expectinge the Duke of 
Parma were not so shorte, her Majestic would have ordered a suppUe to have 
ben made, and so I have moved her verie earnestly ; but her opinion of the 
tyme for their service, and the tyme to make them ready and to shipp them, 
moveth her to deny my motion, 

I finde her Majestie also earnestly bent to have my Lord of Essex forbeare 
to take the charge of so smale trouppes, as a Generall; and therefore, if I had 
not this day diswaded it, her Majestie would have had him presentely 
revoked for that reporte, thinckinge it againste her honor to have so noble a 
man to be her Generall of so small troupes. 

I pray God send you good successe there at Roan, for hitherto all thinges 
goe untowarde. The losse of sundrie principall gentleman of her Majesties on 
that side of the seas hathe greately discoiiraged her to have anie more hazard 
by sicknes; wherin I have sought to satisfie her Majestie that the same 
persons might have died here naturally, as they doe daylie, beinge of greater 
accompte then any there deceassed, wherof I mente your good patron the 
principal! counsellor of i this realme, to whose interrement I shall to morrowe 
geive attendance at Pawles ; and so leade the way for my selfe for others to doe 
the like, in via universce camis. I am sorie to see that you write ^ that you 
have receaved no letters from me since the xi.th of November ; I assure you 
on my faith 1 thincke I never omitted to write to you every 4 or 5 dales, and 
I cannott resolve this misfortune but by imagination that my letters either doe 
remaine at Deepe unsent for lacke of convoy, or sente and loste for lacke of 
convoye. I therfore moste hartely pray you, certifie me as soone as you shall 
receave my letters receaved since the xi.th of November. 

From the Corte at Westminster, the 15th of December, 1591, with a feeble 
hande, but yett with a good harte to you and the cause there. 

Your assured lovinge freinde, 

W. BURGLEY. 

' The conclusion of the letter from this point is in Lord Burghley's own handwriting in the Cot- 
tonian Manuscript. 
» See No. CIV. 

E E 



210 



[Deckmbeb, 



To the right honorable, my verie 
lovinge freinde, Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majestie's Ambassador 
in Fraunce. 



1591, 
15 Dec. 



CXI. 

• Memorandum, to Ottwell Smyth ; concerning the delyverie 
of the Ordenance."' 



hornie to deale in theise matt 
that you had sufficient comission for 
appeare by my former letters written 
ing at that tyme all to your discreation, 
sent for those peeces to St. Vallery : For 
whereof you tooke a verie good course 
nowe gladd our cannon did take so good 
I neither had then authoritie to comand 
nor have not nowe. Sithence I perceive 
it is not in your power to dispose thereof . 
John Wingefieldes servant. I have on 
the King to requyre Sir . 
to make his warrant ; whose authoritie is 
Master of the Ordenance as being Marsh 
I thincke male sufficientlie dispose there 
artillerie be emploied here for Roan 
to which onlie purpose the Queens Ma*'' 
wherefore if Sir Roger Williams doe write . 
artillerie or the King expreslie comande 
this service here, I thincke they ought not . 
In theise matters I doe but delyver my o 



' From the Cottonian M.S. Calig. E. viii. fol. 589. 



A. D. 1591.] 211 

you and leave all to your best discreat 
such good course might be taken, as the 
not be here disappointed in this great ent . 
for want of them. And so with my verie 
commendacione to your good self, I comitt y 
The Campe, this 15th of December, 1591. 



CXII. 

1591, 

19 Dec. "From the Lord Threasurer, Lord AdmiraU, and Lord Chamber- 
line to myseUe and Sir Thomas Leighton ; receaved the 9th of 
January, by Painter.'' ' 

After our harty comendations to your Lordship, we have written our letters 
at this present to our very good Lord, the Earle of Essex, wherby uppon 
verie good reasons we have moved him earnestly to make his retoume heither, 
and have given him our advice howe he may pcrforme the same with his 
honor. And because it male be, he will not of him selfe so readely followe 
our advice as were fitt, we require you bothe to take knowledge therof, and to 
desire of his Lordship the sight of our letter ; and theruppon (not doutinge 
but he will acquainte you there with uppon your desire,) we require you 
earnestly not onlie to move him to conforme him selfe thereunto, as a matter 
that proceadeth not onley of our owne particular affections to him, but uppon 
some weightie cause for his good, (as you bothe may easely imagine .what the 
same is) ; but also by your private and severall dealings with the French Kinge, 
to induce him to like therof, and rather to advise the Earle thereunto then to 
reteine him there stiU in that service unfitt for his person and honor, with so 
indue a charge of soe fewe men to serve him, havinge ben at the first sent 
theither as a generall of such a prince as her Majestic is, over a nomber not 
too greate for him ; but nowe become so smale, as sundrey that went over to 
serve underneath him, might be thought sufficient to take the charge therof. 
' A copy of this letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



212 



[December, 



And because we thincke the Earles nature so desirous of martiall service, 
the tyme nowe so proper for service, we doubt greately that he wilbe hardley 
induced by perswation without pressinge him there unto with much eamestnes, 
we doe require you to use all good meanes you can possible of your selfes ; 
and rather then to faile, we praie you to procure the French Kinge to be a 
furtherrer therof in perswadinge the Earle therto, as a matter we assure you for 
the good of the saied Earle and nothinge hurtefuU to the service of the Kinge ; 
and so uppon the receipt of these our letters and the dealinge therin we 
require you to certifie us your opinion. 

From the Cort, the 19th of December, 1591. 

Your verie lovinge freinds, 

W, BUBGHLEY, 

C. Howard, 
To our freindes, Sir Henry H. Hunsdon. 

Unton, Knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador in Fraunce, and 
Sir Thomas Leighton, Knight. 



cxni. 



19 Dec. 

State Paper Office, " To the Ryght honorable my very good Lorde, the Lord 
France, 1591. highe Treasurer of Englande." i 

My very good Lord. Your Lordships letters of the 26th and 29th of 
November, as also of the fyrstand 12th of this moneth, I receavede alltogether 
the 17th of the same; and whether yt was the negligence of the messengers 
or the want of the passadge, I know not; but I hope your Lordship will 
excuse my so late 2 awnswere of them, scythence they came so lately to my 
handes. 



' The original draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii., where it is 
divided into two portions, one atfol. 25], the other at fol. 582. 
- Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



A. D. 1591.] 213 

By your Lordships letter ^ of the 26th you requyre to know what somes of 
monny Monsieur de Plessys brought with him for the payment of the Reytters, 
wherin -I have certifyede your Lordship by my former letters ; and her 
Majesties gracious allowance and your Lordships good opinion of my negotia- 
tion with the Prince Anhalte, (which I perceave by your Lordships letters ^ of 
the 29th) doth greatly revive and comfort me, beinge cast downe befor with the 
heavy newes of my deare Lord Chancellors death, whose lyfe I wishe the losse 
of myne might have redeamede. Now I wholly and only depende uppon Her 
Majesties favor and goodnes, and your Lordships honorable mediation and 
protection ; which I humbly crave, and wherof I have neade, in respect of the 
malyce and envye of the world, els should I dispayre. 

The care your Lordship committeth to me of martiall matters in your fyrst 
of this moneth,^ in respect of my Lord Generalls absence, is now sufficiently 
dischardged by him ; otherwise I would have performede therin my uttermost, 
accordinge to your Lordships grave directiones and Her Majesties pleasure, 
accowmptinge my self most happy when I receave her commandimentes and 
may doe her service. 

Your Lordships last letters of the 12th * dothe signifye her Majesties 
dislyke of the Kinges letters and demandes for further ayde, as also her 
mistrust that his estate is made worse by the report of the weaknes of his 
forces heare ; and that her Majestie is better advertisede of the Duke of 
Parmas beinge att BrusseUs, and hath greate reason to thynk hee can not 
cume hether to leavy the seege in respect of want of victualls ; lastly, your 
Lordship requyreth me to informe my selfe better of his forces heare abowte 
Roan, and to delyver her Majesties letters in awnswere to the King, with 
other speeche of the unseasonabbies of this tyme of the yeare to sende forces 
hether ; and so your Lordship concludeth with hope of the takinge of St 
Catheryn befor the Duke of Parmas cumminge and then blockinge the towne. 

I am very sory the Kinges unreasonable demandes doe bringe such offence to 
her Majestie, from the which I could not diswade him ; but I dare uppon my 
credyte justefye my former advertisementes of his forces heare ; havinge befor 
and scence the receipt of your Lordship's sayd letters, made diligent inqujrye 
and searche both of the MarshaUes of the lodginge and theyr severaU commis- 
saryes, and by the proportion also of theyr gardes ; wherin wee can not bee 

' See No. LXXXVI. « See No. LXXXIX. ' See No. XCI. 

« Sec No. CVII. 



214 [December, 

deceavede. I have also conferrede with Sir Rogger Williams therin, in 
respect of his former report to her Majestie ; hee confesseth yt to me, and 
excuseth himselfe, that hee reportede the King myght bringe treable the 
nomber befor Roan, yf his armyes myght come hether and most of his garry- 
sones. Other speeche then this hee sayth hee never usede. I confesse yf the 
forces of Memorancye come, as they are dayly expectede, to the nomber of 
3,000, and the Prynce of Cownty, whoe was sent for and is expressely held 
backe by the Duke of Mercury, and his forces (both Spannishe and others ;) 
and yf the Marshall D'Omont were heare with his forces, whoe maketh all 
speede to come ; and Monsieur de BouUon with his forces, whoe is sufficiently 
buysyede with the Duke of Lorrayne that hee can not departe thence ; besydes 
the forces that Monsieur de Nevers hafh with him, whoe is gone towardes 
Compeigne with his Army to make heade to the Duke of Parma ; — yf all 
theise were heare, as they were commandede to bee, then the nomber were 
awnswerable to Sir Rogger Williams reporte. But now the forces heare 
exceede not my former advertisementes more then 500 ; wherof I can make 
good proofe and doe assure your Lordship. That the Duke of Parma is now 
in France att La Faire (where hee kept his Christmas hollydayes,) is assurede ; 
and his forces came longe befor him, under the conduct of his sonn. I sent 
one of purpose to La Faire, whoe doth by his letters confyrme the same. Yt 
is also advertisede that the Frenche leaguers and hee agree not well together, for 
that the Duke of Parma demandeth for his retraict la Faire, Guyse, Soissons, 
Cussy and Laon, otherwise refuseth to ayde them; wherunto the French 
have not as yeat yealdede, and are very unwillinge; neyther have they 
receavede any garryson of the Duke of Parmas into la Faire nor any other 
places, but yt is greatly fearede. 

Whether the Duke of Parma will come hether to leavye the seege is as 
yeat dowtefiill, yeat as your Lordship may perceave by the former letters 
interceptede, and I lately by the lyke doe fynde that the Dukes De Mayne 
and of Guyse doe yearnestly presse him therunto ; yt is not impossible for 
him to come, in respect hee hath many mules and caryadges to bringe 
victuaUs to him. But, as your Lordship gravely wryteth, yt is not probable, 
and very inconvenient, for hee hath noe nearer place of retraict then Pontoys 
and Beauvois ; so that his victualls will bee chargeable, for they must bee 
strongely convoyede, or els they will bee intercepted ; and the contry is and 
will bee befor his cumminge, utterly spoylede ; and hee can not raise the 



A. D. 1591.] 215 

seege heare without a battayle, for all the Kinges £irmy will meete him abowte 
GysorSj Goumay, and Grandviller. Other passadge hee hath none, and those 
townes will then bee of greate importance. If the Duke of Parma seake to 
dyvert this seege by attemptinge some of the Kings townes, as Chawny, St. 
Quyntynes, Noyon, and Compeigne ; — St. Quyntynes is well fortyfyede and 
provydede to endure a longe seege ; Noyon and Chawny the King respecteth 
not so much as his seege heare, nor the losse of them ; but rather then hee 
will loose Compeigne, he will quytt the seege heare and goe with his army 
befor him, which I know to bee yeat the King's resolution and his cowncells 
advyse, albeyt they doe pretende the contrary. 

The takinge of Mount St. Catheryne befor the Duke of Parma come hether 
will bee the only meanes to leave the towne blockede, wherof wee have very 
good hope; but noe attempt hath beene hetherto made, neyther are our 
trenches so neare as may lodge us in theyr dyche, which they have greatly for- 
tifyede. Wee are within a pykes lencth of them and intende shortly to 
attempt sumwhat ; yt wiU cost many mens lyves befor the fort bee taken. 

I have delyverede her Majesties letters to the King in awnswere of his, 
and used such speeche as your Lordship dyrectede ; wherwith hee was very 
much appallede, sayinge hee was weary of himselfe now her Majestie 
did abandone him, and wishede his death might fynishe his miseryes. Att 
the last hee demandede whether I could geve him noe better hope ; I awn- 
swerede him that such was her Majesties fyrme resolution and the tyme of 
the yeare very unseasonable to sende new supplyes out of Englande; so the 
King departede from me much discontentede. 

The next morninge hee sent the Marshall Byron, two of his secretaryes, 
and Monsieur de Plessys to my lodginge to acquaint me with his desperate 
estate without her Majesty's better assistance, and with his forcede resolution 
to sende a gentelman of qualitie in embassye to her Majestie ; from the which 
I did altogether diswade them, insystinge styll uppon her Majesties resolution ; 
notwithstandinge the King now pretendeth to sende Monsieur de Plessys 
only to acquaint her Majestie with his broken estate, and to crave her 
advyse and cowncell. But hee intendeth therby to draw some new sup- 
plyes from her Majestie ; wherof, befor his cumminge, I thought necessary 
to advertise your Lordship. 

The forces of the Duke of Parma are advertisede to bee 5,000 horse and 
14,000 foote, with all his adherentes ; and the Popes army also continueth 
with him, whome the King of Spayne dothe yeamestly solycite to pay them 



216 [December, 

by an embassadour lately sent, wherof the Leaguers promise themselves 
assurance. 

The Marquyse of Couvre hath lately defeated some trowpes of the Duke of 
Parmas aboute la Faire ; hee hath kyUed a 100 and taken 45 very good horse 
of theyrs, and Monsieur la Haye, Marshall of the Duke de Maynes lodginge, 
slayne, and dyrerse taken prysonners. 

Out of Anjou the King is advertisede that the Duke Mercure beeceegethe 
St. Fluren, a castle there in that contry uppon the ryver of Loyer, and so 
intendeth to take the stronge places alonge both sydes of the ryver ; hee is 
accompanyed with 3,000 Spannyardes 1,200 Frenche harquebouses, and 500 
%orse ; wheruppon the King hath commandede the Prynce of Conty with his 
army, and some of his forces of Poictou to releive the sayd castle, and hath 
commandede the Prynce D'Ombes to joyne with them ; also they expect the 
Enghshe forces should doe the lyke. Yf your Lordship might procure those 
forces to continew afterwardes in Bryttany, I thinke they would bee able to 
make warre sufficiently there agaynst the Spanyard. The Duke Mercury 
caryeth 8 cannon with him, and yt is much fearede hee will take that castle, 
and afterwardes prevayle greatly alonge the ryver of Loyer. 

Greate sorrow is heare for the cardynall of Lenoncourt his death, and the 
marquyse of Bellisle to the League (whoe is the marshall of Retz his sonn) 
and for RouUett Governour of Pont de I'Arche and Louviers. Hee was taken 
prysonner by them of Roan, beinge betrayede by his owne companyes, whoe 
had longe servede him, and now made him beleive they would delyver a fort 
of the ennemyes at the farther syde of the ryver into his handes. 

Captayne Chaumont and two lieutennantes were lately slayne; hee was 
a greate ennemy to the King and nourrishede the people in theyr disobedience. 
They of Roan have lost most of theyr captaynes, and the burgesses are well 
inclynede to capitulate with the King, So leavinge farther to trouble your 
Lordship att this tyme, I humbly take my leave. 

The Campe, this 19th of December, 1591. 

Yovir Lordships to commande, 

Henry Unton. 

The Prince Anhalte enquyreth often of me for awnswere of his letter sent 
to Her Majestic. 



A. D. 1591.J 217 



CXIV. 

1591, 

19 Dec. " To Sir Robert CecyU; by John Symons." ' 

Sir, I have receaved your letters of the 26th and 29th of November, and 
your laste of the 1 2th of this moneth ; all at one tyme came to my hands, 
which at this tyme I will answeare in this one of myne. By the two former I 
understande of the death of my lord Chancelor, his debtes, and howe ^ he dis- 
posed of his estate; also by the same you reporte the good opinion her 
Majestic conceaveth of my negotiation with the Prince Anhalt, and of the good 
carriage of my selfe, which are your wourds. And in bothe of them you please 
to advertise me of the reportes of my desire to retoume, and therin you vouch- 
safe to advise me verie honorably and discreetely. By your laste I perceave 
howe unpleasinge the Kings propositions and demandes of men and monie are 
to her Majestic, and her coldnes therin. 

These three letters have wrought twoe severall effectes in me, bothe at one 
tyme. First, discontentement ; then comforte. My lord Chancelor's death 
the former ; her Majesties gratious conceipte of me, and your honorable care 
what become of me, wherfore I leave to dispaire, thoughe not to greive 
passionately. 

It is a true sayinge, Carendo potius qvximfrumdo discimus, so may I saie of 
my deare Lord Chancelor who is dead, and whom I greately honored, not for 
benefitts anie way receaved, but for his vertues and favors to me ; and [I] 
leave your Honor to judge of my greife by my losse. I am nowe engaged to 
none but only my noble Lord your father and your Honor ; bothe whome I 
accounte as one, and will ever honor, foUowe, and serve you as one. I 
presume you will nowe give me leave whollye to depende uppon his Lordship 
and you, for I am nowe free from all others ; and I appeale to your Honors 
former protestations for my assurance, wherof as yett I have all cause to hope 
and none to doubte. 

The reportes of my desire to retoume are strange to me, and the opinion of 
my like desire to stale to lyve in protection for my debtes is more strange. 

' A contemporaneous copy in Cott. MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 14. 
^ Here commences the Cottonian MS. 

F F 



218 [December 

I cannott denye^ I wished my selfe in Englande, with her Majesties favor^ 
since the deathe of my lord Chancellor, and that I had ben never drawne 
from my former countrie lief, which yealded me proffitt and contentement ; but 
I never desired to staie here, thereby to be protected, for my lands are subjecte 
to my debtes, though my body be free by this service. I confesse my debtes 
to be greate, but much greater by this employment ; but not so greate as ether 
I neede protections, or feare to be banckrupt. And if I had not come this 
journey, they mighte well have ben discharged with out sale of land. My 
debtes growe not by unthriftines, nor my lord Chancellors deathe dothe not 
encrease them, neither did his lief protect them ; for I proteste before the 
majestic of God, I ever spent and never gained any thinge by him. What 
purchases I have made and howe much I have bettered my first poore estate 
and redeemed my brothers patrimonie, I leave to the wourld to judge. 

Att my cominge oute of Englande, I did not owe above 3,000^6, and nowe it 
is encreased as much more, which a smale peece of my land wiU paie, and leave 
enoughe for my selfe. The worlde dothe knowe I have paied 8,000^ for land, 
and was never behouldinge to any but my owne father for a penny. Thus 
much I am bolde to laie open to your Honor, from whome I will conceale 
nothinge, and whose favor I will never abiise. 

The feare of my over longe staie in this moste miserable and overchargable 
countrey did move me rather to wishe my retourne then staie ; yett did I not 
write therof to anie. My expenses growe to 10/. the day, one with the other, 
which in many yeares would consume me. The incomodities of campes and 
daylie dangers I regarde not ; only my insupportable charges dothe amaze me. 
I perceave by your Honors letters her Majestic wisheth I should shorten and 
lessen my expenses, which I never will doe to dishonor her. I can make no 
proportion of my expenses, for they encrease with the occasions and diver sitie 
of places and companies ; but my traine I have somewhat abated, havinge 
loste twentie of my company by sicknes and death ; such is the infection of 
this campe. 

Your advise for my staie I will foUowe, and in that and whatsoever ells [I] be 
directed by your Honor ; and if my service here may be acceptable to her 
Majestic, I will regarde nothinge in respecte of her favor. I did not intende 
to sue to retourne as yett, but understoode by Mr. Payne that her Majestie 
was mynded to have called me home, and to lett me live againe in my 
countrey, as heretofore ; wheruppon your Honor, as he writeth, persuaded her 
to the contrary for my good; for the which I acknowledge my selfe moste 



A, D. 1591.] 219 

bounden to you. But, Sir, if her Majestic of her selfe shall please to calle me 
home herafter, and that my retoume procead not of my desier, then I shalbe 
beste contented to doe as she shall please to directe, and wiU serve and praie 
for her in the countrcy and holde my selfe happye, for my ambition is killed 
and my hope of rewarde is couldc, unlesse my honorable Lord yotur father and 
your selfe doe purchase me more then I deserve or looke for. I referr all to 
your wisdome and good favor, and wiU hve as you will have me, and as her 
Majestie shall please to dispose of me ; hopinge my lord Threasurers favor and 
yours shall protecte me from the mallice and envye of the worlde. Other 
protection I will never crave for debtes or otherwise. 

I am sorry her Majestie groweth so could towards the Kinge. He hathe 
neede of more heate. It is my duty to advertise, not to advise. The Kinge 
dothe assure me of the Duke of Parma's cominge on Munday laste to Guise, 
and of his nowe beinge at La Fere, where he intendeth to keepe the beginninge 
of his Christmas ; what shall become of him and us, I leave to the pleasure of 
God. But this I will presume to saie to your Honor, that without her 
Majesties further ayde the cause will fainte. 

Charytie, as your Honor writes, I confesse beginneth of it selfe, and the 
commandement, Love your neighbor as your selfe, must not be forgotten, 
especially when our neighbors house is afyre. I am bold with your 
Honor, but I dare not write so much to her Majestie, yett rather then the 
cause should quaile I wishe the losse of halfe I possesse ; my hast is greate, 
wherfore I end your trouble of my ragged hand, and begg the contynuance of 
your Honors favor and my Lordship your fathers, which only wUl rcAryve my 
worne spirits. 

The Campe ... of December. yours most assured, 

Henry Unton. 



cxv. 

1591, 

20 Dec. " Letter from Sir Henry Unton to the Queen." i 



' From the original letter in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 184, 



220 



[December, 



When 1 my perswasions could not prevaile to sta 
of this gentleman, I then proposed three thinges to 
him speciallie, to geve yo' Ma*'* satisfacion 
was the matter of Bryttanye, which I often soil 
second the paiement and contentment of his ac . 
the contynuance of his seege before this towne 
quiting the same altogether, if the Duke of Par 
come to relieve it, or seeke to divert it, whe 
hath great reason to presse him, for he hath ne 
of a spurre to quicken him, and I knowe he on 
gon and none ells. Theise 3 he doth promise 
fullie to perfourme, and thereof to assure them by 
Amb'', whom he requyred me eamestlie to re 
Highnes : But I will not comitt so palpable 
knowing your experience and foreknowledge of h 
like to be such as I can add nothing thereunto 
fore leave him to your princelie considerat 

Yesterdaie the Counte Soissons departed from 
malcontent, and before his departure would h 
his quarter. He is retyred to his brother . 
house. His discontentment groweth for that 
latelie denie him the gift of an Abbye, and 
to geve him in charge answerable to his call 
but a special! cause is in respect he comand 
companies, but such as are of the Relligion, so . 
affected to the Kinges service, which the Kinge doth 
pose to brydle him, and thereby also to come to th 
of his actions, and disposition. This departure of 
concealed by the Kinge, and his counsell geiving 
he is onlie gonne to keepe Christmas with his 
which is not soe. 



The Campe, this 20th of Decembre, 1591. 

Your Ma'' most humble and 

obedient subject and servant, 

' This appears to be a fragment of the draft of the letter which is found entire at p. 223. 



A. D. 1591.J 221 



CXVI. 

State Paper Office, 

20 Dec. 1591. "To the Ryght honorable my very good Lorde, the 

Lorde highe Treasurer of Englande." * 

My very good Lord. Scence my last dispatche, by John S3^ons the 
messenger, I am secretly advertisede of the Comit Soissons departure and 
retyringe him selve to the CardynaUs howse ; beinge discontentede that the 
King geveth him noe better chardge, and mislykinge greatly with the Kings 
placing of them of the Rehgion under him, and such as are extraordinaryly 
afFectede to the King ; also hee is discontentede that the King refusede to 
grawnt him the gyft of an abbye, excusinge the same with a former promise 
to the Marchall of Byron therof, wherwith the Count much mislykede, 
sayinge that whensoever hee demandede any thinge the King colorde all uppon 
his former promises to the Marshall. Hearuppon hee is departede, gevinge 
yt out that hee goeth to keape his Christmas with his brother ; and so doth 
the King and his Councell afiyrme. I can assure your Lordship the contrary 
of my owne knowledge ; and that yf hee might have had his owne will, hee 
would have burnede his quarter befor his departure, which his companyes 
woidd not permit him to doe. 

Yt pleasede her Majestic, by Sir Rogger Williams, to commande me to goe 
to him and to expresse the care shee had of him, and her desyre to reconcile 
him with the King, and to understande theyr differences ; wheruppon the 
Count, after due acknowledgement of her Majesties goodness and former 
favores, did passionately burst out into speeche agaynst the King, and held me 
with a longe discourse of the causes of his often discontentementes and of the 
indignities hee had receavede, both in the former Kinges tyme and now in this 
Kinges tyme, of him, especially aboute the mariadge of his syster, wherof hee 
was only putt in hope by bimselfe, and by his meanes (as hee sayd) only 
rejectede and disgracede. Many other particularities hee did delyver to me, 
wherwith I will not trowble your Lordship, whoe is not ignorant therof. In 
the ende hee concludede with many protestationes to serve Her Majestic. But 
I doe not beleive him, knowinge him to bee a mortall ennemy of them of the 
' The draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 583. 



222 [December, 

Religione. Hee hath a stronge witt, greate couradge, and many good partes 
in him ; but is poore, ambitious, prowde and glorious, and not belovede nor 
greatly foUowede ; yeat doth hee endevor to make himselfe heade of a thyrde 
faction, wherof are Monsieur Espernon, the Grand Pryore, (whoe maryed 
Memorancyes daughter) and others ; whoe bee neyther RoyaUstes nor 
Leaguers, 

This dissension mil greatly hynder the Kinges service in this tyme, but 
many doe laboure theyr reconciliation, and some hope ther is of good successe. 
They may bee reconcylede in the opinion of the world, never inwardly in 
theyr hartes, for theyr myndes bee meerely contrary and not compatible. 

The beinge of the Duke of Parma in France is dayly by our advertisementes 
confyrmede ; and yf hee come not hether to raise the seidge, but suffer the 
King to take Mount St. Catheryn fyrst, then will the towne capitulate and can 
not hold out longe. 

Monsieur de Plessys craveth yeamestly to bee recommendede to your 
Lordship, and the King requesteth yt in his behalfe ; hee is, as your Lordship 
knoweth, of greatest inwardnes with the King, and hath many rare gyftes in 
him to procure your Lordships good opinion, and doth greatly reverence your 
Lordship. Your Lordship doth ever favor men of his sort, wherfor I neade 
not recommende him ; but yf att my sute your Lordship will please the rather 
to favor him, I shall acknowledge this with the rest of your many favores. 

I have written to her Majestie of my conference with the Count Soissons 
and the causes of his departure, because shee commandede me so to doe by 
Sir Rogger Williams. My humble sute to your Lordship is to keape me in 
her Majesties favor and to stande now my only patron, wherof I have neade ; 
for malyce and envye doe now, scence my Lord Chancellors death, seake to 
diffame and disgrace me. I can not honore your Lordship more then I did 
him, but I will as much devote myselfe to your Lordships servyce as ever I 
did to his. Yt pleasede your Lordship, at my departure, to promise me the 
assurance of your favor, which I have hetherto most constantly founde. I am 
nowe ingagede in this chardge, and very unable to dischardge yt without 
your honorable favor and grave directiones. What my fortune is or may bee, 
shall bee only disposede and commandede by your Lordship, whome I wiU ever 
honestly and faythfuUy honore and serve ; and so I humbly take my leave in 
hast, this 20th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordshipes wholly to commande, 

Henry Unton. 



A. D, 1591.] 223 

Scence^ the fynishinge hearof, Sir Edmonde Yorke was hurt in the trenches 
befor the Fort of Mount St. Catheryn, with a stone cast by the ennemy, 
which fell uppon his forheade ; wherof hee hopeth shortly to bee curede. Yt 
is more payneftdl then daungerous ; hee is heare att my lodginge, and humbly 
desyreth to bee remembrede to your Lordship, whome hee doth greatly honore ; 
hee is a very valiant, discrete and paynefiiU gentleman ; and doth very greate 
services to the Kinge. 



CXVII. 

1591, 

20 Dec. "To her Majestic; by Mr. Lyllye." 

It may please your moste excellente Majestic to be advertised that, accord- 
inge to my late advertisements to my lord Threasurer, Monsr. Du Plessis is 
sente in embassy to your Highnes, with full and ample comision from the 
Kinge to enforme you of the state of France, and of his former actions and 
further intentes ; therby to procure your further satisfaction and allowance, as 
also to crave your Majesties advice and prevalent dirrection, with out 
demaunde of more aide, as the Kinge pretendeth ; beinge satisfied (as he saieth) 
with your late resolution signified by your letters to him, but much awakened 
and grevied with your offence conceived againste him, expressed by the same 
letters, and made also knowen to him by his Ambassador. 

When ^ my perswasions could not prevaile to stale the sendinge of this gen- 
tleman, I then proposed three things to him, wishinge him especially to geive 
your Majestic satisfaction. The firste was the matter of Bryttayne, which I 
often sollicited. The seconde, the paiement and contentement of his armye. 
Lastely, the contynuance of his seege before this towne, with out quittinge the 
same altogether, if the Duke of Parma either come to releive it, or seeke to 
diverte it ; wherin your Majestic hath greate reason to presse him, for he hath 
neede some tymes of a spurr to quicken him, and I knowe he only feareth you, 
and none ells. These three he dothe promise me faithfully to performe, and 
therof to assure you by this his Ambassador, whom he required me earnestly 
' This postscript is not contained in the Bodleian transcript. ^ See p. 220. 



224 [December, 

to recomend to your Highnes ; but I will not comitt so palpable an error, 
knowinge your experience and foreknowledge of him and his like to be such as 
I cann add nothinge therunto, and therfore leave him to your princely con- 
sideration. 

Yesterday the County Soissons departed from the camp, malcontent ; and 
before his departure would have burned his quarter. He is retired to his 
brother the Cardinalls howse. His discontentement groweth, for that the 
Kinge did lately deny him the gifte of an abby, and also refiiseth to geive him 
a charge answerable to his caUinge and merritt ; but the especiall cause is in 
respecte he commandeth over noe companies, but such as are of the Relligion, 
or to well affected to the Kings service ; which the Kinge dothe of purpose to 
brydle him ; and therby also to come to the knowledge of his actions and 
disposition. This departure of his is concealled by the Kinge and his 
counsell, geivinge it out that he is only gone to keepe Christmas with his 
brother, which is not soe. I have had twice conference with him, as your 
Majestic willed me, by Sir Roger Williams, and have understoode by him selfe 
the causes of his often mutynes and discontentements, which he promiseth 
from tyme to tyme to reveale to me ; and so did he nowe before his departure. 
He humbly acknowledgeth your Majesties manie favors and care of him ; to 
whome he saieth he will ever appeale in all differences betweene him and the 
Kinge ; yett dare I not promisse my selfe so much of his devotion to your 
Majestic, for that he is superstiousUe bent on enemetie to them of the Relligion, 
and would make himselfe hedd of a third partye and faction, wherof Monsr, 
D'Espernon and the grand Prior, nowe Counte of Auvergne, with others doo 
shewe them selfes neither royallists nor leaguers. The Kinge was jallous of 
my conference with the Counte Soissons ; yett did I take my opportunytie 
to speake with him in the Kings absence, and went expreslie to his quarter, 
foure leagues hence. I did the beste offices I could to reconcyle them, and 
founde the Kinge verie bitter againste him ; alleaginge that the Counte neither 
loved him nor your Majestic, and hated the English nation, and all strangers 
of the RelUgion. It will hinder the Kings service greately if your Highness 
doe not wourke some better reconcylliation. 

If I importune your Majestic to often with these my letters, I humbly crave 
pardon ; for it proceadeth meerely of duety and desier I have to please you, 
whose gratious favor is the only marke my mynde shooteth att, wishinge only 
to live to obey and serve you, and esteeminge myselfe never happy but when 
I receave your Majesties commandements and allowance of my indevours • 



A. D. 1591.] 225 

wherof bothe by my lord Threasurers letters and my lord Generalls reporte I 
understande, to my singular comfort and encouragement. 

It has pleased God to call awaie my lord Chancellor, my honorable good 
lord Chancellor, to my no smale greife ; with whom I was first bredd upp, and 
to whom (nexte to your Majestie,) I was moste bound ; wherfore my nowe 
humble vote to you is, that I may whollie and imediately depend uppon your 
favor and goodnes, and therby in my honest causes to be protected from the 
mallice and envie of the worlde, which dothe violently burste out since his 
death againste me, by raysinge untrewe reportes to diflFame me ; wherin I doe 
wholly and only appeale to your sacred Majestie, whose favor I will never 
abuse, and ever indevor to preserve, with all loyall and sincere duty. The 
hope I have of your Majesties favor is that which dothe nowe nourishe me. 
And so I moste humbly comitt your Highnes to the protection of the Moste 
Highest. 
The Campe, this 20th of December, 1591. 

Your Majesties moste humble 

and obedient subject and servant, 

Henry Unton. 



cxvni. 



1591, 

21 Dec. " To the lord Threasurer ; by Sir Thomas Challoner." ' 

My verie good Lord. Her Majesties of the 6th and three of your Lord- 
ships of the 4th 5th and 6th, I receaved this mominge ; wherunto I cannot so 
suddenly make answear, by reason of this gentlemans hast and my wante 
of leisure to confirr vidth the Prince of Anhalt, whome the saied letters^ doe 
specially concerne, and to whom also her Majestie hath written, [which 
letters with the coppie thereof and the ... . Conwey did but this morning 

&gt; The original draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 254. 
' Here begins the Cottonian MS. 

G G 



226 [December, 

deliver unto me long stay for want of convoye. I am sorie your Lord- 
ships letters are] ^ so negligentley conveyed by those to whom you comitt the 
charge of them, and some tymes they are opened and dihvered into such hands 
as they come verie late and careleslie to me ; for some of the messengers will 
come no further then Deepe, and no one poste but Symons dothe attende 
uppon mee. They say Mr. Otwell Smythes pacquetts are more gaigne unto 
them; and they geive out, to my discredit, that his letters are of more 
importance and better esteemed. Herof I presume to complaine to your 
Lordship, beinge forced to sende messengers of myn owne almoste contynuallie, 
and beinge defamed here by such reportes, and in England by the like and 
worse. 

I feare to advertise untrewe reportes and to discourse uppon them, as others 
I knowe doe ; the truthe of them I firste desire to knowe and then to reporte 
them, and to deliver myn opinion I dare not. It was a lesson your Lordship 
was pleased to geive me at my departure, which I will never forgett. My 
humble sute to your Lordship is to protecte me with your favor, and to 
admonishe me with your grave counsell, which I will ever obey, and duely 
reverence and honor your Lordship as becometh for the same. 

The Duke of Parma, as it is advertised, begineth to march; and the placinge 
of his cannons upon his carriages dothe shewe he rather intendeth to beseege 
some towne then to come directly heither to levye this seege. He hathe 
summoned Chawney, Noyon, and Compeigne to render themselves unto him. 
St. Quintins is saied to be to stronge for him ; wherwith he cannott nor will not 
meddle. Some feare his manner of sumons is rather to blynde us then other- 
wise, and that yett he meaneth to march directly to us, which is not so pro- 
bable. Howesoever it be, the Kinge prepareth to fight with him ; and if he 
beseege anie of the Kings townes, he meaneth to waite uppon him himselfe 
with 4,000 horse and not to abandon this seege here ; this is his newe resolu- 
tion. 

Some dissention is betweene the Duke of Parma and the French leaguers for 
the demande of those fyve places for his retraict, wherof your Lordship under- 
standeth by my laste ; as also for that the Duke of Parma governeth and 
commandeth all, without the Duke of Maines consent. Herof I am advertised 
by one whome I have imployed and sente to his campe, where he contynueth, 

1 The passage within brackets, omitted in the Bodleian transcript, is supplied from the Cottonian 
copy, where it is slightly imperfect, this volume having been damaged by fire. 



A. D, 1591.J 227 

and is of good judgment. They have not as yett admitted anie garrison of 
the Duke of Parmas into La Fere, wheruppon he greately insisteth, and is 
likely to prevaile ; and the Duke of Parma much misUketh Mounsr. de Maine 
his late proceedings in Paris, wherof he maketh a weake defence. Mons. de 
Guise hathe more grace of the Duke of Parma than the Duke of Mayne, for 
the which they both strive ; and Monsr. la Chastre dependeth more uppon the 
Duke of Guise then the other and dothe whollie directe him. This encreasethe 
their jallioussy and discontentement. 

The Cardinall of Bourbon and the Counte Soissons are both greately 
mistrusted; for the Cardinall, as yt is supposed, is the cheife cause of the 
Counte Soissons withdrawinge himselfe, and is discontented for that the 
Kinge would not suflFer him to sende to Roan in the name of the cleargie, by 
the which meanes he intendeth some badd practises againste the Kinge and 
his estate. The late arreste made in the Parliament hath forbidden the same 
sendinge, which they say they wiU maintaine, and wherewith the Kinge 
couloreth his deniall, and the clergy seeke to suppresse it. That arrest againste 
the Popes BuU the parliament also have lately published, and saie they will 
justefie ; yett doth the Cardinall and the clergy seek to suppresse it also ; and 
to withstande the authoritie of the ParUament. 

Great meanes is made to reconcyle the Counte Soissons to the Kinge, 
wherof here is nowe some better hope ; but he will never be inwardly recon- 
cyled before the Cardinall be better disposed to the Kinges service, and the 
Kinge bestowe his sister in marriage uppon the Counte Soissons. It is adver- 
tised that she dothe nowe begine to affecte him, because the Kinge doth not 
otherwise provide for her. 

This gentleman, Sir Thomas ChaUoner, is forced by sicknes to retoume, and 
humbly craveth your Lordships good favor towards him ; wherof he saieth he 
hathe heretofore tasted. He is of good courage and discreation, and dothe 
greately honor your Lordshipp. I am sorry her Majestic so much disliked 
the Kinges knightinge of him and others. It was not my faulte, but the 
Kings favor forced uppon me and them, which neither they nor I could 
modestly refuse ; and for that Sir William Sackvyell and Sir John Burroughe 
had heretofore receaved the like honor of him, without her Majesties oiFence, 
I did the rather thincke her Highnes would not have misliked ; but it shalbe 
a sufficient warninge nowe I knowe her Majesties will and pleasure. 

The Prince Anhalt is agreed with the Kinge untill the tenth of February ; 



228 [December, 

and I hope the Kinge shall have meanes to satisfie him and the rest accord- 
inge to the newe rowles : for it will not much exceede 50,000 crownes a 
moneth, and untill the 10th of Febraary next they cannott complaine. So I 
humbly take my leave. 

From the Campe, this 21st of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 



CXIX. 

1591. 

21 Dec. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Sir Thomas Challoner."i 

Sir, Your firste I receaved last ; for yours of the sixte of this moneth 
I receaved but this morninge, wherin you say you are neither negligent nor 
curious. I am proude to iinde you so honorable, constante, and carefuU to 
favor and advise me, which is nowe my ^ only comforte, and wherof I have 
neede, as you may perceive by my former. 

Your repetition of her Majesties good likinge of my dealinge with the 
Prince Anhalt dothe shewe the desier you have to geive me comforte ; but the 
dislike she hath of the Kings knightinge those that followed me dothe greive 
me. It was not my desier nor fault, it was his pleasure, which he pretended 
should be a favor ; but it is nowe a disfavor to me in respecte of her Majesties 
dislike. Hereafter I will more groselie refuse such favors from the Kinge. 
One of the three knightes is dead, so the number is not much encreased. It 
shalbe a warninge and is nowe a greife to me. 

Your advice for my stale here I will foUowe and obey, as in all things, 
wherof by my former I have written at large. It was never my meaninge to 
aske leave but to see my Lord Chancellor for some fewe dales. I am more 
weary of myselfe to lyve atall then to lyve in France ; and so I may lyve to 
doe her Majestie service, I will desier hef, and accounte myselfe happy to 

' The original draft is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 256. 
- The Cottonian draft here begins. 



A. D. 1591.] 229 

lyve. She is to dispose of my stale or retoume, and which she beste hketh 

shaD beste contente me. In the meane seasson I humbly thancke your Honor 

for your advice and care, wherin you binde me more then I can expresse. 

The conjectures that are made of me and my intentes are moste strange, and 

I humbhe thancke you for your better opinion and defence of me. I knowe 

it is a strange president for an Ambassador leiger to retoume, and it is as 

strange to me that any should thincke I have a mynde to retoume to leave 

her Majesties service; wherunto I have wedded myselfe not for yeares but 

for hef ; and the fidlers (as you tearme them,) doe deale therin, I proteste with 

out comission from me ; and they and others of good creditt write to me 

that her Majestie had, and hath, a mynde to revoke me ; wherof I beseeche 

your Honor to advertise me. I have in my laste letters humblie complained to 

her Majestie (but in generaU tearmes) of the maUice and envye of the worlde ; 

I pray you, Sir, to leame howe she taketh it and respecteth me ; you shall 

greately pleasure me therin, for I heare diverse reportes, and I knowe by your 

Honor I shall leame thetruthe. 

I coraplaine to my noble Lord your father, in my letters to him, of the 
reportes that are made of others better advertisements then myn, and that 
Otwell Smythes pacquetts are better paied and esteemed then myne. Herin 
I humbly beseech your favor, and lett me knowe whether it be soe, and further 
with your wisdome my Lord Threasurers better protection of me. It is a 
trewe saylnge in ItaUian that " AH' arbore che cadde, ogniuno grida dagli ! 
dagli ! " and so they may doe with me beinge disgraced. 

Lett me be so much bound to you to knowe howe my services are esteemed 
and my intelUgences, for I proteste they are bothe chargeable to me, and I 
will accordingly frame my selfe. So with aU due thanckfullnes for your manie 
favors, wheruppon I styll relie, I humbUe take my leave. 
The Campe, this 21st ' of December, 1591. 

Your Honors moste bound, 

Hexry Unton. 

' In the Catalogue of the Cottonian MSS. this letter is erroneously ascribed to the 22nd of December. 



230 [December, 



cxx. 

1591. 

23 Dec. " Againe from the saied three Lords ; receaved as 

before is also mentioned." i 

After our verie harte comendations. Wee doubt not but you have well 
considered our letters, dated the 19th of this moneth, sent to you [by] 
Wyntlie ^ wherby we did earnestley require you to joyne in advise with us to 
the Earle of Essex to retourne heither into the realme ; and further also to 
deale with the French Kinge as he should bothe licence and advise the Earle 
to retourne ; consideringe the manifest decaie of his nomber, which he had in 
charge, was such as it was no honor for him, beinge a person of his degree, so to 
remaine with the charge of so smale nombers as are lefte. And as we had 
many reasons to move us at the tyme of our writinge, so nowe at this present, 
by the reportes which we have from thence bothe of the day lie decrease of the 
nombers and of his hazard in many privatt enterprises, to the danger of his 
person, we finde daylie cause more and more to renewe our former advise unto 
his Lordship to hasten his retourne. And to this purpose also we doe 
reitterate our earnest request unto you both, moste earnestly requiringe you to 
further this our motion. And if you have not already dealt with the French 
Kinge to further the same, then to proceede therin without delaie, and to 
further the same ; and to that purpose we thincke the French Ambassador 
here will write to that effect to the Kinge, so as we hope we shall not need to 
renewe this our advice unto you, but will expect before anie answer to be sent 
from you the retourne of the Earle himselfe. And so we leave to trouble you 
with any further matter. 

From the Corte at White HaU, this 23th of December, 1591, 

Your lovinge freindes. 
Will. Burgley, 
Char. [Howard,] 
Henry Hunsdon. 

' A copy of this letter is found in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. yiii. fol. 198. 

2 Probably the name of the messenger; in the Cottonian MS. it is " sent to you, Whatley." 



A. D. 1591.J 231 

[Postscript in the Lord Threasurers hand.] 

The Queenes Majestie misliketh that 
Du Plessis dothe come heither, and I 
wishe he had not come ; for he cannott 
profitt, but offende. 

Her Majestie is offended with you that 
you permitt my lord of Essex to adven- 
ture his person so manie waies without 
your reprehension. 

To our lovinge freindes, Sir Henery 
Unton, Knight, her Majesties Ambassa- 
dor in France, and Sir Thomas Leigh- 
ton, Knight. 



CXXI. 

1591, 

25 Dec. Theparticular charge of Sir Henry Unton, knight, 

her Majesties Ambassador into Fraunce, for his 
transportacons, carriages, and other ordinary 
charges since his departure, from the 13th of 
Julye until] the 20th of December in the same 
yeare, 1591.' 

Item, for carriage of some of my stuffe from London 
to Dover, xx.li. 

For 46 poste horses from London to Dover, xxiiij.h. 

For the transportacon of my horses, stuffe, and ser-^ 
vantes, from London, wher thei weer shipped ; and 
my selfe and my company and other chardges from 
Dover to Deepe, with pillotage ther dewe, 

• In the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 214, is preserved a copy of a portion of this document, 
extending as far as the sum of £ 293. 



Ixxxj.h. 



232 [December, 



For carryinge my stuffe from Deip to Strawneye, 
beinge 56 leagues, xlviij.li. 

For my horses from Deip to Strawneye xl.li. 

For the chardges of such as were with me to con-i 
vey me untill my cominge to the key, and reward o' y xl.li. 
them, J 

Sum totall cclxxxxiij.li. 



xxij.li. 


xiij.s. iiij.d. 


ciij.li. 


TJ.s. 8d. 


c.li. 




ciij.li. 


vj.s. viij.d. 


c.li. 




Ixvj.U. 


xiij.s. iiij.d. 


Sum v'.li. 





Wheras I receaved now lastlye of the Queenes Majesties money by im- 
presse the somme of v'^.li. by Tertue of her Majesties privye scale, bearinge 
date the 22th day of Julye in the 33th yeare of her Majesties raigne, the saied 
some is to be defalked in allowance of my diet after the rate of 311. 6s. 8d. the 
day, which is now expired the 20th day of December in manner and forme 
foUowinge, and allowing 28 dales to the monethe. 

For my diet of 8 dayes in July beginninge in the 23 
daye therof, the saied dale beinge inclusive. 

For xxxj. dayes of Aguste, 

For 30 dales in September, 

For 31 in October, 

For 30 daies in November, ,, 

For 20 daies in December, 



Mr. Peeters, 

I pray you deliver to this bearer, my servant, Nicholas Payne, the somme of 
28011. money now dewe to me byimpresse by vertue of the Queens Majesties 
Privie Scale, bearinge date the 22th of July in the 33 yeare of her Highnes 
raigne, for allowance of my diet from the 20th day of December till 3 monethes 
nexte foUowinge be expired. 

Dated at the campe of Roan, the 20th of December, 1591. 

Your verye lovinge friende, 

Henry Unton. 
To his verie lovinge frende 
Mr. Auditor Peeter, Esquier, 
of her Majesties Exchequer. 



A. D. 1591.] 233 

Wheras I receaved, ut supra. 

For my diet of ij. dales in December, beinge on the 
20 day therof, the saied somme beinge inclusive, xxxvj.li. xiij.s. iiij.d. 

For 30 daies in Januarye, ciij.li. tj.s. viij.d. 

For 29 daies in Feabruarie Ixxxxvj.li. xiij.d. iiij.d. 

For 19 daies in March Ixiij.h. vj.s. viij.d. 

Sum totall 300 h. 

Mr. Peteers, 

I pray you deliver this bearer, ut supra. 
Dated the 19th of March, 1591, at Diepe. 



CXXII. 



1591, 

25 Dec. " To the Right Honorable my very good Lorde, the Lorde 
highe Treasurer ofEnglande." ' 

My very good Lord. Yt may please your Lordship to advertise her 
Majestie that the Kinge hath gaignede the cownterscarfe of the hethermost 
fort of Mount St. Catheryne, without any greate losse ^ to him, but with very 
greate losse to the ennemy, whose guardes there and in the dyche were cutt in 
peeces, and som forcede to retyre into theyr rampare ; with whome some of 
oures entrede^esfe mesle, with intente to take the sayd fort therby ; which they 
had done yf the leaders had beene well secondede. 

The Kinge appointed to this enterpryse an hundred Englishe, over whome 
Captayne Swann, Captayne Boswell, Captayne Dockwry and Captayne 
Mustian, with lieutennant Norrys, commandede ; also certayne Lanseque- 
nettes and French shott did accompany the Englishe to this peece of servyce. 
They were severally directede to diverse places, and commandede to surpryse 

' The original draft of this letter is in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 258. The original letter 
is preserved in the State Paper Office, from which this text is transcribed. 
' Here begins the copy in the Cottonian MS. 

H H 



234 [December, 

the ennemy in his cownterscarfe and dyche ; and yf they could, not only to 
putt them to the sworde there, but entrynge with them in theyr retraict, to 
wynn the hethermost fort. The enterpryse was desperate, and with greate 
resolution of the commanders well executede ; beinge now of noe small im- 
portance to the King, for by that meanes in one nyght wee have prevaylede 
more then wee should have done in a moneth, and with much less losse 
of pyoners and sowldyers ; wheras now they lodge safely in the cownterscarfe, 
and with the sappe wiU shortly take the forte. Of oures of accompt only 
Captayne Swann is hurt and shott in the arme. Of the number of the ennemy 
slayne and hurt I can not yeat certaynely advertise your Lordship. 

This doth greatly discouradge them of Roan, and will the sooner draw on 
the capitulation with them of the towne ; and yt doth not a lytle comfort the 
King and incouradge his. My Lord Gennerall was present att the enterpryse, 
ready to seconde the fyrst forces yf they had beene distressede, and shewede 
very greate couradge and goverment. His Lordship humbly beeceecheth her 
Majestic to excuse his not wrytinge, beinge forcede to lye in guarde all this 
nyght and the nexte day, to fortefye the cownterscarfe and to defende the 
same. The Kinge himselfe was also present with to much forwardnes, and 
requyrede me to goe to the trenches with him, wherby I was forcede to 
become a beholder of this service ; wherfor I may the better justefye this my 
advertisement. I assure your Lordship I hope now better of Roan then 
befor, and am perswadede the fort can not longe hold out. Then doe the 
burgesses resolve to make a composition, yf they bee not very shortly 
succorede. 

By letters of Villars this day interceptede, wrytten to the Duke de Mayne, 
yt appeareth in cypher they want powder and munition, and have lost theyr 
best leaders and ingyners, wherof Villars greatly complayneth. And hee 
dowbteth if the Duke of Parmas meanes to succore him without a battayle to 
bee geven to the King ; and hee feareth the burgesses wiU force the soldyers 
to yeald to a composition, they beinge (as hee sayth) discontentede for pay. 
Wherfor hee requyreth monny, munition, powder and all diligence to sende 
succores or to geve the King battayle. This late exploict will more dis- 
couradge them and drawe them to dispeare. 

The Duke of Parma marcheth with intent to passe by Ammiens, and so to 
come to Diepe to take the Polett and beeceege the towne, and then to leavye 
this seidge. Hearof the King is advertisede, and groweth fearfull; wherfor 



A. D. 1591,] 235 

hee hath commandede the Govemour of Diepe to fortefye the same better. 
This newes is neyther credible nor probable, yeat possible. Some advertise 
that the Duke of Parma and his forces are not farre from Amiens, att this 
tyme, which I have noe reason to beleive ; of his beinge in frame and readynes 
to marche I dowbte nothinge. 

Your Lordships letter of the 15th I receavede the 23th; wherof, as also of 
your former letters, I will within a day or two sende awnswere ; in the meane 
season I crave pardon, beinge overwearyede and overwatched in the trenches, 
and makinge hast to advertise this our good successe. And so I most humbly 
take my leave. 

The Campe befor Roan, this 25th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordshipes to commande, 

Henry Uxton. 



CXXIII. 



1591, 

26 Dec. " To her Majestic ; by Payne." ' 

Your Highnes letters of the 6th of this moneth, directed to the Prince of 
Anhalt and me, I receaved the 21th, beinge verj' sorry they came so late to my 
hands, to the hinderance of your '^ Majesties service and to my unhappy pre- 
judice, you havinge thereby conceived offence againste me for renewinge the 
Kings demands, and recomendinge the same by my letters of the 9th (contrarj- 
to your pleasure and resolution signified by your Majestic,) wherof I proteste 
before the sendinge of myne I never heard wourd nor letter, as may manifestly 
appcare by comparinge the dates of the saied letters, and by this my late 
receipte. Neither had I such meaninge att aU to recommcndc his demands, 
which I holde impossible to be satisfied, this tyme of the yeare considered, 
and moste unreasonable. I hope the letters thcmselfes conteyne only my 

' A copy of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 260. 
- Here begins the transcript in the Cottonian MS. 



236 [December, 

advertisments therof, which the Kinge iirged by his owne letters and by his 
ambassador, it beinge my duty to geive your Majestie first knowledge of such 
his demands and onely recomendinge the same to your princely pleasure and 
due consideration. For I knowe it to be beyonde the compasse of my 
callinge and understanding to advertise your Majestie, and farr beyond my 
creditt to procure so highe favors ; and I never intended, to please the Kinge 
or any other, so much to importune your Majestie in that manure or charge, 
but ever indevored to wourke the contrary, as by the Kings letters and the 
Prince of Anhalts sent longe since is manifeste. Wherfore I humbly beseech 
you to admitt this my excuse, and to give me leave to appeale from your late 
offence to your favor, usinge noe other intercession then the prostratinge my 
selfe at your Majesties feete. 

I have delivered your Majesties letters to the Prince Anhalte, who after his 
perusaU therof, did demande of me if I had receaved anie more particular an- 
swear from you touchinge his requeste for further contribution, conteyned in 
his letter ; wherunto I answered that he never acquainted me with any such 
clause of his letter, and that I was sorry he had so written, contrary to his 
promise to me, which I had often made knowen to your Majestie, as also his 
late agreement with the Kinge, and the Kings payment accordingly. Wher- 
fore I requested him neither by letter nor his intended journey into England 
to renewe any such requeste to your Majestie, assuringe him if he did it woidd 
procure my utter disgrace with you. Also I layed before him the hope of 
Roan, and many meanes the Kinge had to satisfie him, and in the ende con- 
cluded my speech with the effecte of your Majesties intended postscript by 
your letter to him, wherof my lord Threasurer did write to me ; so nowe the 
Prince is well satisfyed, and for my privat reporte promiseth to make noe such 
motion herafter to your Highnes ; albeit he saieth he doubteth of the Kings 
next paiement the lOth of the French February, and he resolveth to staie this 
journey into England, especially to any such purpose, takinge the effecte 
of your Majesties postscript moste kindley, which by speech as a messuage I 
delivered. 

If my credit were as good with the Kinge as it is with the Prince of Anhalt, 
I should not doubt to doe your Majestie the like service, but I can neither stay 
his demands nor his messengers; yett have I not omitted to deliver your 
Majesties absolute pleasure and resolution in such manner as I was directed. 

The count Soissons is retoumed to the corte and his peace made with the 



A. D. 1591.] 237 

Kinge, but he dothe not in harte reconcyle himselfe. Great meanes hath ben 
made for him, and his fault colored by me and others. 

So leavinge further to trouble your Majestie, and dependinge onely and 
whoUy uppon your gratious favor, I moste humbly comitt your Highnes to 
the protection of the Almightie, Who make you all and ever happy accordinge 
to your care and princely vertues. 

From the Campe before Roan, this 26th of December, 1591. 

Your Majesties moste humble subjecte 

and faythfull servant, 
H. U. 



CXXIV. 



1591, 

26 Dec. " To the lord Threasurer ; by Payne." ' 

My verie good Lord. Yours of the 15th of this moneth I receaved 
the 23th ; wherof, as of your former of the 4th and 5th, it may please your 
Lordship to receave answered in this owne of myn, not insistinge so much 
uppon the former as uppon the laste of the 1 5th, yett not ^ omittinge to answer 
any matter of importaunce conteyned in eyther or any of them. 

That of the 4th conteyneth the effecte of her Majesties letter to the Prince 
Anhalt, with your Lordships directions for my delyverie by speech of the 
postscripte intended firste by her Majestie to have ben inserted in the same, 
and after lefte to my charge to delyver accordinge to the occasion. Then your 
Lordship expresseth your 3 doubtes conceived of our actions here ; first, in 
respecte of the Kings wante of meanes to pay the Reyters, and so of the 
corruption of the armye by the Indian money ; secondly, in respecte of the 
weaknes of our Englishe forces, who, as your Lordship conceiveth, serve rather 
for name or opinion then for any good effecte ; lastely, in respect of our wante 
of powder and munition, and of the jallousie your Lordship conceiveth of the 

' A copy of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 262. 
3 The Cottonian copy here begins. 



238 [December, 

Kinges counsell, remayninge for the moste parte at Tours and Mants, so ill af- 
fected to this service for his relligion ; wherin your Lordship requireth 
my opinion. 

Concerninge her Majesties letters to the Prince Anhalt, and the effecte of 
the postcripte ; I have not omitted the delyverie of eyther, accordinge to your 
Lordships directions, without offence by him conceived, but rather with all 
kindnes, and have both diswaded him from his journey into England, or any 
other motion, by letters of more ayde from her Majestie, takinge all uppon my 
selfe ; as by letters to her Majestie your Lordship maie more particularly per- 
ceive. He is a playne German, and offereth to be much directed by me ; and 
I doe the more insynuate my selfe into his good opinion to doe her Majestie 
the better service. 

To deliver my rawe conceipts of your Lordships doubts I will presume, 
beinge more willinge to obey your Lordship then able to satisfye you therin, 
reservinge your better opinion, and submittinge myn to your better judgment. 

Your Lordships first doubte of the Kings paie of his Reyters, and feare of 
their revoulte, is grounded uppon all reason, and very probable. But the late 
agreement made and newe accorde intended, the coppies wherof I send you, 
beinge not yett throughely digested or perfected ; this beinge donne (which I 
earnestly labor to bringe to passe) will binde them sufficiently to contynewe 
their service, and give the Kinge better meanes to paie them, in respecte of the 
newe rolles, whose paie will not then much exceede 50,000 crownes a moneth, 
and in respecte of the comodities, which they offer to accepte in leiwe of paie. 
And in this tyme of their stale the Kinge will take Roan or never, or geive an 
overthrowe to the Duke of Parmas forces ; a matter of as greate consequence 
to him. 

To the seconde doubte ; of the weaknes of the Englishe heare, I protest to 
your Lordship, albeit the number be verie smale, and they very defective, yett 
do they performe more in this seege then all the reste of the Kings infantrie ; 
for they garde in three severall quarters, and in all services, and especially 
ussed, wherby they wilbe shortely more weakened ; such is the Kings necessity 
to use them, and so bad are the reste of his infantrie. Onely the Swisses 
besides the Englishe doe him service ; and they serve him but for gards, for 
they will never keepe trenches, skirmishe, nor give an assaulte at a breach. 

Your Lordships laste doubte, of the Kings want of powder and munition is 
well satisfyed by your Lordship sendinge 25 lastes of powder and pykes by the 



A. D. 1591.J 239 

Englishe marchants, with whom the Kinge is in a manner agreed for their 
securyty ; but the other parte of your doubte, touchinge the ill affection of the 
Kings counsell is rightely conceived, and cannot be answered ; for they feare 
the Kings over greatnes and forwardnes to be governed by her Majestic in the 
establishment of relligion, and they themselves would onely governe him and 
his resolution ; and the reste of the Cathohckes dayley threatten him with 
their revolte, if he forsake not his relligion. 

The liste your Lordship requireth, in your saied letter, of all the Kings 
forces, and their comanders, as also of his counsell of warre and other affaires, 
I will shortly sende ; and it requireth some time to make it perfect, and to 
write it, for the which I have no other helpe then such as I have gathered since 
my beinge here. 

By your letter of the 6th you note the Kings decaied estate and wante of re- 
garde to importune her Majestie with so often and unreasonable demandes ; 
to whome your Lordship comandeth me to communicate seacretlie with him 
her Majesties sale of lands, borrowinge of moneys, and her chargable resistance 
she is forced to make againste the Kinge of Spaines invasion, intended so 
mightelie againste her Majestie the next sommer. For the Kings poore and 
decaied estate, I muste needs say to your Lordship it is moste misserable and 
lamentable. He is a Kinge without a crowne, and hee maketh warrs without 
money ; which will not longe laste when his subjectes shalbe so much impo- 
verished as they cannott serve him, and they so wasted as they arre with 
warres as they cannott be able to serve him. The decay daylie and the warres 
will consume them, and he cannott longe subsiste if his auxiliaries forsake 
him, and if God doe not holde His holly hande over him. Her Majesties re- 
solution I have signified and delivered, with such speech as your Lordship 
required me ; but he saieth sometymes his necessities have no lawe, and that 
he shall perishe if her Majestie forsake him, yett doe I discourage him what I 
maie ; and cannott diswade him, thoughe I use sufficiente arguments to 
diswade him. This manner of my service cannott be but unpleasinge to her 
Majestie and the Kinge, which is my unhappines. 

As touchinge your letter of the 1 5 th wherby you please to geive me to 
understand of her Majesties offence conceived againste me for renewinge the 
Kings demands and recommendinge the same, contrary to her pleasure signified 
by her letters so longe after the sendinge of myne, and compareth the date of 
hers of the 6th with myne of the nyneth and 10th, it will appeare I had no 



240 [December, 

such foreknowledge of her pleasure nor receipte of such letter, and your 
Lordship knoweth howe much I complayned before for wante of anie letters 
from your Lordship. And I hope my letters sente to your Lordship at that 
tyme doe not otherwise recomende the Kings requestes then to leave them to 
her princely consideration and your Lordships wisdome. My meaninge was 
onely to advertise her Majestic, before the Kings letters should come written 
to that very purpose, and my wourds can have no other instruction. I humbly 
thancke your Lordship for makinge my lawfull and juste excuse, wherof I have 
presumed to write unto her Majestie, as beinge guyltlesse, and humbly 
entreate you Lordship thorougly therin to satifie her Highnes. 

For newes I can but advertise your Lordship of the Counte Soissons and 
the Cardenalls late cominge to the corte to make their peace and to reconcile 
them selves to the Kinge, beinge farr from their hartes and contrary to the 
greatnes of their minds. The Counte saieth as yett he will not retourne to his 
quarter and former charge ; and desireth the Kinge to imploye his service 
aboute him, as a privatt man, and hath his lodginge soe appointed. Greate 
meanes have ben used to reconcyle him, and I have donne my indeavor therin 
amonste the reste. 

The counter-skarfe of the enemyes lately gotten, and yesterday advertised 
to your Lordship, was since loste and taken by them. It could not be 
fortefyed so suddenly to be defended, and many was hurte on bothe sides 
before it was wonne. My Lord Generall was not then present, and our men 
and the enemy were longe at the pushe of the pike. The Kinge hopeth very 
shortely to recover it, which will coste the lives of many ; yet muste he hazarde 
them, or ells the tyme wilbe longe before we advance so farr by our trenches, 
for we wante myners, and her Majesties are not yett come nor heard of, greately 
to the hinderance of the Kinges service. We have as yett no certeyne adver- 
tisement of the Duke of Parmas marchinge towards us, nor of his intentes to 
levy or diverte the seege. The reports are divers ; and if he come not before 
the Kings forces assemble, our fear wilbe the lesse, otherwise v« nobis. 

Oute of Province I am advertised that the Kinge of Spain adviseth the 
Duke of Savoy to retourne into Savoy, aleadginge the Popes mislike againste 
him in Languedoc and Province, and that himselfe muste be forced to take 
them into his owne protection ; wheruppon it is sayed that he is either re- 
tourned, or will very shortely. The Kinge of Spaine growethe jealous of his 
greatnes. 



A, D. 1591.] 241 

The Kinge is certenly advertised of the Duke of Casimire his mediation 
between the Kinge of Spaine and the Lowe Countreys for a peace. He is 
wonne there unto by the Dutchesse of Prusia, in hope of marriage betweene her 
daughter and the Duke Casimires nephewe. She shalbe one of the Duke of 
Prusias heirs, and (by the Dutchesse) heir to the Duke of Cleave, if his sonne 
dye ; for the Dutchesse, as your Lordship knoweth, is the Duke of Cleaves 
sister. 

Monsr. Mompensier is come to the campe with all his horse and foote, to 
the number of 3,000 ; and the Marshall D'Omont is shortely expected with 
800 Swisses, and 1200 French foote, besides 500 horse more is reported, 
but doubted ; and Monsr. De Bouillion is sent for with aU his forces, who 
hath levied (as it is said) the seege of Astenaye. 

The Duke Mompensier and the Counte Soissons doe mortallye hate each 
other, and doe begine here to renewe ther maUice, which the Kinge dothe all 
he may to appease in outward shewe, but not in harte. He is of the mynde 
of the late Kinge, rather to nourishe faction betweene the Princes of the bloode 
then to reconcile them ; and resolveth to leave his kingdome so devyded. 

So havinge nothinge ells wourth your Lordships advertisement, I moste 
humbly take my leave. 

The campe, this 26th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordshipes to commande, 

Henry Unton. 



CXXV. 



"The proposition of the Kings comissioners to the Reysters, 
conceminge the payment of ther arrerage of their pay." 

Quant a ce qui touche ce present moys, il sera paye tout entire, sans rien 
rabattre de ce qui a este preste, encores que sa Majestic eust en volunt^ de 
rebatre largent preste, come aussy celuy de la levee. 

Mais nayans assey apport^ dargent, nous avons bailie un terme aux 
Collonells et Restuires jusques au 10"' du moys suivant; auquel nous 

I I 



242 [December, 

payerons en votre nom aux CoUonells Bern, Birsdorf, D'Hona, et Creange, a 
chacun dix huict cans escus ; et aux six Reystuires de Prince D'Anhalt, quatre 
cens escus a chacun, quils nous ont preste pour complir ledict mois. 

Le 10"^ Fevrier suivant, Ion leur sera redeuable de quatre moys que le Roy 
permett de paier ; a scavoir, deux moys selon les vieux rooles, et ce sur bonnes 
asseurances et promess en certain temps, duquel temps sa Majestie traictera 
et accedera avec monsigneur le Prince d'Anhalt, seront moustre et nouveaulx 
rooles. 

lis recevront ausy audict temps, a scavoir le 10"= Fevrier, de paye, a scavoir 
les deux tiers en argent, en rabattant toutes promesses et asseurances, come 
aussy largent preste et celuy de la lev^e, et laultre tiers en draps et aultres 
marchandise. 

Quant aux trois solz que Monsr. de Turrenne avoit promi en AUemaigne de 
faire restituer, le Tresorier fera un conte de ce que poura estre paie a un 
chachun, et ce qui se montera il luy sera paie le 10°= Januer suivant. 



CXXVI. 



" The Answer of the Reytors to the aforesaied proposition." 

Sur la proposition de messiuers les Comissiares qui est quils ont offert aux 
Reisters de leur paier deux mois le 10""= Februer, a condition quils passeront 
moustre, et que lesdicts deux mois seront paies selon les noveaulx roolles en 
trois parts, a scavoir deux tiers en argent, et lautre tiers en drap, velours, et 
aultres marchandises ; declarent lesdictes Reistres, qu'en cas qu'on leur paie 
les deux mois le 10°= Februer, stile noveau, ils sont contents de faire moustre, 
et prendre un demy moys en drap, vellours, et aultres marchandises a pris 
raisonable, et ce en bref pour habiller eux et leurs serviteurs. 

Quant aux aultres deux mois, a scavoir le cinqesme et sexeme, les Reistres 
sont d'accord, selon les nouveaulx rooles, et ce sur bonnes asseurances et 
promesses qui seront trait^s entre mon diet Sr, le Prince D'Anhalt et leurs 
deputes. 



A. D. 1591.] 243 

Aussy demandent lesdicts Reistres que quand ils sen retourneront, quils 
soient contentes selon leurs deputes. 

Davantage, declarent lesdicts coUonells et Reistuires encores que selon les 
noveaulx rooUes le nombre des chevaulx soit amoindri. lis ne se veulent rien 
laisser rabattre de leurs estats et appointementes, ou aultreraent ils naccorde- 
ront point ladicte moustre. II semble aussy aux collonells et Reistuires pour 
le melleur a coll[?], a fin que les comettes ne deviennement plus foibles, quon 
les renforce de quelques uns, et sans rabatre de leurs estats et appointementes. 

Aussy demandent lesdicts Reystres que leurs capitulation soient faictes 
semblables a celles du Sr. D'Ammartyn. 

Ce cy est le intierice[?] resolution des Reistres en laquelle ils veulent 
demeurer, sans entrer en alcun aultre traicte avec lesdicts Srs. Comissaires. 

Faict au quartier la Motte, le Dimanche, douzieme de Decembre, 1591, 
SHlo veteri. 



CXXVII. 



1591, 

26 Dec. "To the Lord Threasurer; by Payne."' 

I have sent your Lordship my bylls by the said Payne, of transportation, 
and of other my expences for her Majesties service, wherin I humbly crave 
your Lordships favorable allowance and honorable consideration. The bylls 
are not rated accordinge to my expenses, because they should rather shewe my 
desiere to spare her Majestic then to burthen her with ^ extraordinary charges, 
in respecte of the greatenes of my traine, which I am forced to keepe in a 
manner for my garde and safety, and in respecte of the excessive dearnes of 
this countrey occasioned by warres. And thoughe my service cannot deserve 
soe muche as her Majestic alloweth me, yet this tyme dothe require considera- 
tion to be had cheifly of my estate, that my care how to live male not hinder 
the onely care I have, and ought to have, howe to serve. Change of tyme 

' A draft of this letter is found in the Cottonian MS., fol. 264. See No. CXXI. 
* Here the Cottonian MS. begins. 



244 [December, 

hath brought change of allowance, yett I crave but such allowance in these 
things as some of my predecessors have had. I protest unto your Lordship 
of 2,500/. I brought over in this countrey in my purse, and of \,500l. made 
over to me by Otwell Smyths meanes since my beinge heare, I have not lefte 
above 500/. And my allowance for diet dothe not defray weekly the charges 
of my horse by 20/. a weeke. I had at my cominge over to Deepe 62 horses, 
wherof 16 were coche and carriage horses, which I cannot wante here when I 
travell with the Kinge to carry my provision for meate and drincke, findinge 
nothinge by the waye out of townes in a runinge campe. In my laste journey 
to the Kinge I loste eleven horses, and have since discharged 8; and lesse then 
40tie, I cannott keepe, by reason of my carriages. I would not have beleived my 
charges should have ben so greate, but my accompte was wronge made, and 
therfore my reckoninge falleth shorte ; aU which I recken not, so my service 
may be acceptable to her Majestic. 

Intelhgences were never so deare, because of the danger of the passages and 
of the tyme. Here in Corte I have the beste, which are for the moste very 
badd; and therfore am forced to employe manie in diverse countreies, and the 
letters of those I employ are as chargeable as their intelligences, and for the 
moste parte intercepted. 

I will not longer entertaine your Lordship with this my private case, assur- 
inge myselfe of your Lordships reasonable and favourable consideration of these 
my billes, while I humble take my leave, with offer of my beste service to you 
and yours. 

The Campe (in haste) this 26th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships moste bounde, 

Henry Unton. 
This bearer, my servant, Nycholas 
Payne, I doe sufficiently authorise 
for the receipte of such monies as 
growe due to me from her Majestic ; 
wherof I presume to informe your 
Lordship. 



A. D. 1591. 245 



CXXVIII. 

1591, 

26 Dec. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Payne." i 

Sir, I am nowe begginge of my noble Lord yoiir father to rate reasonably 
my bills I send of my expences for transportation and other charges of her 
Majesties service, usually allowed to my predecessors. Your furtherance 
therin ^ may greately pleasure me, wherefore I beseech your honor to be a 
meane for the same. This tyme doth require some consideration to be had of 
me, yett do I desire no more then hath ben heretofore allowed to some in the 
like case, thoughe never in the like tyme. I have commanded this my servant, 
Nycholas Payne, to deUver my letters in your presence, the bills beinge there 
inclosed ; wherfore I humbly praie you direct and favor me what you may. 

I understande by my Lord Thereasurer howe her Majestic was oflFended for 
my recommendinge the Kings demands, which I did only advertise, and that 
his Lordship hathe made my excuse ; yett he willed me to write to her 
Majestic my selfe, which I have donne accordingley ; wherof, as of her 
Majesties opinion towards me, doe me the favor to advertise me. You knowe 
howe much I am bounde to you, and have nowe cause to depende uppon you, 
which comforte dothe make me bare the late unhappines the more patiently. 
And I finde myselfe exceedingly bounde to my Lord your father, wherof 
your favor onely I knowe hathe assured me ; and for the which I will ever be 
ready to serve and followe him, and requeste you in my behalfe to lett him 
knowe so much, because he sheweth my letters to the Queene. I dare not 
write due complements to him, or such other discourses as some tymes I 
woulde. 

My lord Generall telleth me howe her Majestic intendeth to revooke me with 
her favor ; wherof if you finde contjmuaunce, I humbly beseeche you to deale 
for me as you shall thincke beste ; for I will whoUy be governed by you. I 
am unwillinge to sue to retourne ; and if her Majestie doe it of pittie towards 
me and favor, if you will advise me, I meane then to be a suter for it. My 

' The draft of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E viii. fol. 266. 
2 Here begins the Cottonian copy. 



246 [December, 

Lord of Essex would needs have dealt for me by his letters, which I staied, 
meaninge wholly and onley to be directed by you. He professeth greate love 
to me, and saieth he hath donne good offices with the Queene for me. 

We are all here ashamed of the losse of the enemies counterskarfe, which 
we had desperately taken and is nowe recovered from us. It killeth our hope 
of Roan, yett we sale and write the beste. Of the Duke of Parmas marchinge 
towards us we here no certenty ; we feare greately his cominge, and then 
actum est de nobis. Sende me, I beseech you, some good newes of the name of 
the place you possess already ; after which, for many respectes, I have cause 
to longe. All men speake most honorably of your merritt and carriage of 
your selfe, wherof I doe not a littell rejoyce. And so cravinge your often 
letters, I moste humbly take my leave. 

The Campe, the 26th of December, 1591. 

Your Honors most assured, 

Henry Unton. 



CXXIX. 

29 Dec. 

State Paper Office, " To the Ryght honorable my very good Lorde, the 

France, 1591. Lorde highe Treasurer of Englande." i 

My very good Lorde. The King hath this last nyght regaignede the coun- 
terskarfe and trenches of the fort lately lost, wherof by my last I did advertise 
your Lordship. Also wee attemptede by scallinge ladders to have taken the 
hithermost fort ; but the ladders were to short by the lencthe of a halbert ; so 
our enterpryse therby faylede. Our last errores committede by not forteiy- 
inge the place after wee had obtaynede yt, wee doe now amende by keapinge 
stronge gardes and fortefyinge the place with all possible dilligence ; so that 
by tomorowe yt will bee made tenable with a small garde agaynst all the 
ennemyes forces. The ennemye did quytte the cownterscarfe immediately 
uppon the assalte, so the losse was small on both partes ; som few of oures 

' The draft of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 268. 



A. D. 1591.J 247 

were hurt, but none of accompt, only Captayne Masterson was shott in the 
arme. The more particuler disco wrse hearof I leave to my Lord Genneralls 
report, whoe can best descrybe the same, wherin hee was an actor ; and this 
gentleman, captayne BosweU, can sufficiently enforme your Lordship, whoe 
hath servede very well. 

The King now resolveth to gaigne the fort by the zappe, but his want is 
greate of our myners ; hee hopeth very shortly to take the fort and doth now 
make the greater eGFort in respect of the Duke of Parmas cumminge towardes 
him, whoe is abowte Corbie in Pyccardye, and in his passadge intendeth to be- 
cceedge thattowne ; which yf hee doe, the King himselfe resolveth to make head 
agaynst him with all his cavallerye. I can hardly beleive the Duke of Parma 
can bee so farre advancede ; yeat such is his advertisement. 

Out of Bryttanye yt is advertisede that the Marquise of Bellisle and his 
forces are lately defeated by some for the King ; and his mother the Ducchesse 
of Retz is heare in cowrt makinge his excuse, and assuringe the King notwith- 
standinge of her loyaltie and her husbandes. 

The Cownt of Auvergne, lately callede the Grand Pryor, hath intelligence 
with Monsieur de Nemours, to whome hee gave secrete meetinge ; and uppon 
his retowrne to Clermount could not bee suffrede by the towne to enter in, 
alleadginge they were gellous of his conference with Monsieur de Nemours 
and of his loyaltie to the King. Hee seaketh to erect a Tierce Partie, as they 
terme yt, and neyther to avowe him selfe to bee a royalist or leaguer ; and 
som opinion is conceavede that Monsieur de Nemours, now a leaguer, will doe 
the lyke of this Thyrde Partye. The Count of Soissons did laboure to bee 
heade, wherunto his ambition only reachede ; but hee is poore and of noe 
credyte. 

The Duke of Parma hath lately reprochede Monsieur de Mayne for havinge 
secreate intelligence with the King in treatinge of a peace without his privitie 
and foreknowledge ; and some harde speeches passede beetweene them uppon 
the retourne of Grammont. This, and the former unkyndnes, doth breade yll 
bloodd in the Duke de Mayne ; and hee doth now underhande labowre the 
more yearnestly for a conclusion of peace, wherof I can assure your Lordship. 

The Duke of Parmas forces, which hee brought with him, were not above 
5,000 foote and 2,000 horse ; and his whole army with the leaguers can not 
exceade 20,000 horse and foot. Hee hath sent backe for his mutenous 
Spannyardes, and intendeth to diflFerre his greatest enterpryses untyll theyr 



248 [December, 

cumminge. The King is very fearful! of Diepe, where hee fortefyeth as much 

as hee can. 

Some doe persuade the King that the Cownt Maurice draweth neare to the 
frontyers of France with his army, to cume uppon the back of the Duke of 
Parma ; which is neyther credible nor probable. 

So beinge forcede to ende by reason of the soddayne dispatche of this 
messenger, hopinge shortly to advertise your Lordship of the takinge of Mount 
St. Catherynes, wheruppon the King doth bende all his force and lodgethe 
therabowtes of purpose, I most humbly take my leave. 

The Campe, this 29th of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships to commande, 

Henby Unton. 

The Garrison of Chawny have defeatede 400 lanseknyghtes of the Duke of 
Parma, which defaict doth greatly discontent him. 



cxxx. 

1591, 

29 Dec. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Capten Boswill." &gt; 

Sir, our late losse of the counterscarfe of the enemies trenches is recovered 
with out greate losse ; onley Capten Masterson is shott in the arme. Our 
further intent ^ was by scallade to take the first forte of Mounte St. Catherines ; 
but our ladders were to shorte by much, and soe we failed of that enterprise. 
Nowe we labor by sappe to wynne the forte, wherin our English myners 
would specially further the Kings service, wherof we heare nothinge. Your 
Honor may doe well to hasten them. Our former errors, which was the cause 
of our loosinge it, we shall amende ; for wee nowe keepe stronge gardes and 
fortefie better ; so by regayninge of this we recover our honor and former hope 
to doe good. 

1 The original draft of this letter in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 272. 
5 Here the Cottonian MS. begins. 



A, D. 1591.J 249 

The cominge of the Duke of Parma towards us doth presse the Kinge to 
attempte the forte with more fury, the takinge wherof is of greate consequence 
for the gayninge of Roan, either by composition or by force ; otherwise we 
dispare of all good. We wante nothinge but men, munition and money; and 
I dare not so much as thincke of more ayde from you in England. God must 
assist us by miracles, for we wante all meanes. My Lord Generall is but 
to forwarde and present in all services, and failelh much of his will that he 
is not one of the firste, the second he wilbe ; I meane of those that use to 
second the first. Other newes I have none wourthy the writinge, wherfore I 
moste humbly take my leave without ceremonies. 

The Carape (in all haste) this 29th of December, 1591. 

Your Honors moste behouldinge to comande, 

Henry Untox. 
[To the draft is appended this postcript.] 

Sir Thomas Leighton humbly craveth of your 
Lordship to be excused for not writing. He 
speaketh all the honor he can of you, and 
desyreth his dute and love may be remembredd 
in this postcripte. 



CXXXL 



1591, 

3 1 Dec. " To the Lord Thereasurer ; by the lord of Buckhursts 

Secretarie." ' 

My verie good Lord. This daye the Kinge departeth towards Gizors, where 
he intendeth to be to morrowe, to drawe his whole armye of Reyters into those 
partes in respect of the Duke of Parmas hastninge to levie this "^ seege, wh6 is 
at a village called Nesle on this side of Noyon, and his vantgard with Monsr. 

' The original draft is preserved in the Cottoniau MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 249. 
• The Cottonian draft here begins. 

K K 



250 [December, 

de Maine at Mondidier. They intende from thence to take the waie of Beauvois, 
and so to to come directly to Roan ; but the Kinge eiideaToreth to empeach 
their passage aboute Gournay or Gisors with his cavallerie, which waie the 
Duke of Parma muste of necessitie take, if he march directely to Roan. This 
sudden allarum dothe greately amase the Kinge, in respecte the Kinges French 
forces are not yett joyned with him ; wherfore his course intended is onely 
to make hedd to the Duke of Parma with his cavallerie, to gaine some tyme, 
untill all his forces be assembled, and then to give him battaile ; and I greately 
feare for wante of forces he wilbe forced to abandon his seege, beinge a thinge 
impossible with all his armie to keepe this towne blocked and yet to give the 
enemye battayle. This is my opinion, for the maynteyninge wherof I coulde 
alleadge many reasons ; yett male it prove otherwise, and so the Kinge woulde 
have us beleive. 

I thought good to foUowe the Kinge in this jom-ney, because it is uncertaine 
when he will retourne, and himselfe did also require me to attende him. 
Albeit those journeys be unpleasant and verie chargable, yett to further her 
Majesties service I will forbeare no trouble nor charge. 

Of this my departure with the Kinge I presume to advertise your Lordship, 
that you may knowe what becometh of me, and that I may receive her Majesties 
comandements and your Lordships directions accordinglie. The Prince 
Anhalt dothe accompany the Kinge in that journey, who is not throughly 
recovered, and forced to ride in his coatch. 

My lord General dothe stale accordinge to her Majesties comandment, and 
(as I thincke) is more willinge to retourne then to staie here in this moste 
misserable countrey. His servants and souldiers die day he ; and some, of the 
plague. So leavinge to trouble your Lordship, beinge forced uppon a verie 
shorte warninge to departe, I moste humbly take my leave in all haste. 

The Campe, this laste of December, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comande, 

Henry Unton. 



A. D. 1591.] 251 

CXXXII. 
" From Sir Robert Cecyll ; receaved also by Painter." i 

Sir, I sende you heare a letter of the Queenes to the Earle of Essex. Her 
pleasure is that you keepe it untiU you see whether uppon the other letter 
nowe brought him he come awaie. If he doe not provide presentley to 
retourne (which is lefte to his owne judgment what he findes bothe honorable 
and fitt to be donne,) then imediatly delyver him this letter without any 
further stale ; for it conteyneth some thinge fitt for him to understand before 
he write hither agayne ; but if he be the messenger himselfe, I pray you 
safely send it me againe, for such is her Majesties pleasure. I will answear all 
the particularities of your last longe letter by my next, for nowe I cannott. 
And so referringe you for all other matters to my Lords letter, I rest moste 
assuredley, 

Yours in all faithfuU good will, 

Robert Cecyll. 
To my honorable freinde, Sir 
Henry Unton, her Majesties Am- 
bassador in France. 

' See Unton's letter to Sir Robert Cecyll, dated lOth Jan. 1592. 



252 [January, 



CXXXIII. 

1592, 

6 Jan. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Clifford." i 

My verie good Lord. The Kinge came to this towne uppon Saturday laste, 
and the nexte morninge departed to Mantes to conferr with Monsr. de Neuers, 
who was greately discontented, and had lefte his former charge of the Reyters, 
refused to goe with them to make hedd to the Duke of Parma accordinge to 
the Kinges directions, and was ready to depart with his companies of horse 
towards Champaigne withoute leave; but uppon the Kings conference with 
him he is reconciled, and nowe offereth to foUowe the Kinge, refusinge any 
other charge of Reyters then his owne French Companies. He required money 
of the Kinge, and stoode uppon the same tearmes as the Reyters, and hathe 
used all meanes possible to breake the Almaigne armye, as the Prince of 
Anhalte assureth me. Also, he hathe greately invayed againste her 
Majestie and the Marshall of Byron for drawinge the Kinge to the seege of 
Roan, leavinge his frontiers. This his course geveth great jallousie of his 
loyaltye. 

The Prince Anhalt and the cheife CoUonells have nowe thoroughly ac- 
corded with the Kinge, the coppy wherof I have sente your Lordship here 
inclosed ; ^ and albeit it male be gathered by the accorde rather the contrary, 
in respecte of the conclusion, and not directe answers, yett I can assure your 
Lordship this manner of accorde is already accepted by the Prince Anhalt and 
the cheife of his army, and some couler used to drawe the multitude the 
sooner to like therof. This newe paiement, after newe roUes and partely in 
comodities, wilbe much more easie to the Kinge, who saieth he shall have 
within these tenn dales 100,000 crownes to satisfie them againste the tenth of 
their February, and the reste in comodities, which the Prince of Anhalt 
promiseth to accept ; which beinge payd, they cannot departe before St. John's 
day, by which tyme we shall gaine Roan or never. Also the Prince of Anhalt 
hath already taken the Kinges owne obligation for securitie, though no such 
mention be therof in the accorde. 

1 The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 

' The enclosure here mentioned has not been preserved with the letter. 



A. D. 1592.] 253 

The Reyters reraaine nowe encamped aboute Beauvois, and their shall 
continewe to hinder the Dake of Parmas passage. The Kinge maketh all 
haste to them, and from thence intendeth to march towards the Duke of 
Parma with 2,500 French horse, which are already come to him, and with 
1 000 Reiters, to stoppe the avenues of the Duke, to hinder his passage over 
the waters, to spoile and harrie the countrey throughe the which he muste 
passe, to intercepte his victuells, to waite uppon his armie at their risinge and 
lodginge, and so to defeate some of his troupes, and by these meanes to amuze 
him, and to enterteyne tyme untill the reste of his forces be assembled. 

The Kinge assureth himseh'e of the reste of his forces within 15th dales. 
For Monsr. De Bouillion marcheth with all diligence, and the Marshall 
D'Omont and Monsr. de la TremouUe with manie others ; so that the Kinge 
shalbe able to make of French horse 6,000, countinge those before Roan, 
which are 1,200. All the infanterie that cometh to the Kinge he sendeth 
day lie awaie to Roan, and onley reserveth his cavallerie, with 1000 harque- 
busiers a cheval. But the Kinge is forced to drawe moste of his horse out of 
his garrisons and of his foote, as the Duke of Mayne also dothe, and resolveth 
to give the Duke of Mayne battayle ; which he muste accepte, or ells he 
cannot succor Roan, and then it cannot otherwise be but that the Kinge muste 
raise his seege, for he is not able to make good bothe. He intendeth not to 
geive battaill untill the enemye be very neare Roan, and so engaged as hee 
shalbe inforced to fight. 

The Duke of Parma is at Nesle not farr from Ham, where he hathe staled these 
14 dayes, refusinge to march untill the leaguers shall possesse him of some 
places of retraict, accordinge to my former advertisements ; and did insist 
much uppon the delyverie of Beauvois, which they of the towne utterly refuse ; 
and the Duke of Maine, to prevent his havinge of La Fere, hath placed there 
his wife and children of purpos. This dothe much discontent the Duke of 
Parma, and hath ben partley the cause of his stale, and the Leaguers are verie 
unwillinge to deliver any townes into his handes. The other cause of his stale 
is saied to be his sendinge backe for two regiments of Spaniards, whom 
he shortely expecteth, but his last resolution was to march towards Beauvois 
this verie dale ; and nowe the Kinge goeth to Gournay, where he shalbe 
within 13 leagues of Nesle; and when the other marcheth, he will doe the 
like. 

The armie of the Duke of Parma is saied to consiste of 13,000 foote and of 



254 [Januaky, 

almoste 6,000 horse. Manie of his arriere bands are retourned and would not 
staie with him ; and Artoys and Hennault refuse to ayde him in this action 
againste the French Kinge, because they saie they only shall suffer for it. The 
infextion is very greate in the armye, and the Itallian army almoste utterly 
decaied by sicknes. Some 400 horse are onely lefte. 

The Duke of Parma wilbe forced to have daylie 100,000 loafes of bredd for 
his souldiers, which all the leaguer townes are not able to fumishe, and the 
carriadge of it wilbe very chargeable and dangerous. This is as much as I can 
learne of the state of his armye. 

A towne of Berry called Charoux is lately taken by batterie and rendered to 
the Kings obedience, and two or three other stronge places of good im- 
portance ; so that the whole countrey of Berry is allmoste brought to 
quietnes, excepte three or foure townes. 

The Duke of Mercure is saied to have taken St. Flurent in Avion, but is not 
assured. The Prince County maketh all haste to joyne with the Prince 
D'Ombes, and is comanded not to departe that countrey; so the Kinge shall 
have greate wante of his forces at the battell. 

Monsr. Espernon refuseth to come to the Kinge as he was comanded, and 
maketh slender excuse for his not cominge. And the Counte D'Auvergne 
also refuseth to come with his forces. He nowe writeth himself of Valloys, 
wheras he was wonte to write him selfe of Orleans, as he should doe, beinge 
base borne. The humor the other Kinge did putt in him of suceedinge him 
in his kingdome will not yett be extinguished. We looke for noe good effectes 
from him, but his father-in-law, Monsr. Memorancy, sheweth all loyaltie to the 
Kinge and dothe him good service. 

Your Lordship cannott but heare of the Kings losse of St. Vallery. If it be 
taken by the enemy by scallado, as he is advertised, it will hinder the Kings 
service verie greately ; but, as he is advertised, it is a place of noe strength and 
male be easely recovered. 

Out of Germanic it is advertised that the princes of the Religion there 
growe backward since the death of the Duke of Saxe, and that the Calvanistes 
profession in Saxonie is forbidden, and the late Chancellor, the Secretary, and 
other cheife favorers therof imprisoned, and those of that profession verie 
greately persecuted. 

Out of Itallie we learne nothinge, for our letters are intercepted ; and other 
newes I have none wourthye of your Lordships advertisement; wherfore I 



A. D. 1592.] 255 

moste humbly take my leave. From Guizors, departinge to Gourney, wher 
the Kinge will lodge this night, the 6th of January, 1591. 

Your Lordshipes to comande, 

Henry Uxtox. 
I am forced to sende my owoie servants 
and horses with my letters for wante of 
messengers to attende me, which is bothe 
dangerous to them and chargeable to me ; 
wherfore I beseech your Lordship to com- 
ande them to attende, or ells I shall not be 
able to send so often as I would, when I 
travil with the Kinge. 



CXXXIV. 



1592, 

6 Jan, " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Clifforde." 

Sir, I am nowe in the middest of my misseries, beinge forced to followe the 
Kinge with all manner of discomodities and extraordinary expence, and noe 
greater safety ; for he saieth he wiU leade me every day to the warre, as it is 
verie likely ; but I take more care for my purse then my person, and I 
respecte not the dangers soe much as I doe the discomodities of a runninge 
campe, wherin we have neither lodginge nor good victualls. Yett to doe her 
Majestie service here, I cannot doe or indure to muche, and I wishe my 
manner of service might rather be scene then reported ; then should I be more 
pittied and respected. The Kinge was verie desirous to have me with him, 
and I as willinge to attend him, because I might the better come to the know- 
ledge of the enemies desseings, and of the Kings actions ; and I am never so 
acceptable with the Kinge as in journey, when he goeth to the warr ; which 
respectes doe the rather drawe me to followe him, regardinge more her 
Majesties service then myne owne estate. 



256 [January, 

This day the Kinge marcheth to Gourney, and from thence towards the 
enemie, with 2,500 French horse and 1,000 Reyters. The rest of the Reyters 
shall remayne by Beauvois. Goumay is within 13 leagues of Nesle, where 
the Duke of Parma hath ben these 14 dales, and marcheth from thence this 
day, as it is saied. 

The particulars of his forces and of our intended resolutions you shall better 
understande by my letters to my lord Threasurer ; wherunto, for your Honors 
better ease, I referre you. What we doe in this journey shalbe trewly 
reported and advertised with aU dilligence; but I wante messengers to attende 
me, and am forced to sende my owne servants, with hazard to them and charge 
to myselfe, besides the unfurnishinge myselfe of them wherof I have need. 

The Reyters and the Kinge are accorded, and I hope will contynue, albeit 
the Kings owne servants have used all meanes to breake there armye. I 
proteste I have ben more troubled with reconcylinge the Duke Anhalt and the 
King, then with all other services since my cominge heither ; but aU is nowe 
brought to a conclusion, and I hope we shall keep them untill St. Johns day, 
by which tyme we shall either gaine Roan or a battaiU againste the Duke of 
Parma. I will not longer weary your eyes with my ragged hand, wherfore I 
moste humbly take my leave. 

From Gizors, this 6th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Honors to comande, 

Henry Unton. 



CXXXV. 

1592, 

6 Jan. " To Mr. Vicechamberline ; by Cliiford." 

Your Honors letters of the seconde of December 1 receaved the 22th of 
the same, wherunto I had made answere before this tyme, if the unpleasant 
newes of my honored Lord Chancelors death had not so much afflicted me as 
it hath done, and not without just cause ; wherfor I humblie crave pardon for 
this my so late answeare, and doe promise to make ameandes by my better 
dilligence herafter. 



A. D. 1592.] 



-'3/ 



By yoiir honorable letter I perceive howe fewe of myne you have receaved, 
which is others fault and my greife; and wheras your Honor is pleased to 
require my often advertisements, I wiU not faile therin to performe my duty ac- 
cordingly, acknowledginge myselfe moste happy when I may doe you service, 
and yealdinge all dewe thanckfullnes for your many favors, and especially for 
your honorable opinion conceived of me, and for your goodnes in assuringe me 
of your furtherance of her Majesties gratious conceipt of my service, wherbv 
your Honor bindeth me beyonde all hope of deservinge, and for the which I 
will ever honor and serve you duringe Uef. 

This place, wherin I nowe serve, hathe need of your Honors protection, and 
myselfe am nowe utterly destitute of freinds ; wherfore the more I nowe 
taste of your favor, the greater incouragement and comforte I shall receive, 
and the lesse feare the mallice and envie of the worlde ; which I humbly crave, 
and wherof I presume in respecte of your Honors promise, 

I am nowe attendinge uppon the Kinge in this cavalcade he maketh towards 
the Duke of Parma, which is specially intended to amuze the Duke and his 
forces and to enterteine tyme, untiU the Kings nobillity be assembled, wherof 
he maketh accompte within 13 dales. He hathe allready gathered together 
2,500 French horse, and shall have as many more when Monsr. De BouiUion 
and the Marshall D'Omont shall arive, who are expected \\'ithin 10 dayes, 
besides other forces, and besides those which remaine at Roan ; so that if he 
drawe them altogether to fight a battall, as he resolveth, he shalbe able to make 
6,000 French horse and 1 ,000 harquebusers a chevall. 

If his infanterie were proportionable to his cavaUerie, we might promise greate 
matters and enterprises, and in a manner victory before he fight. The Duke of 
Parma hath ben at Nesle, not far from Ham, these 14 dales ; and resolved 
to marche towards Roan by the 15th of this moneth. He demanded divers 
places for retreate, and amongste the rest Beauvois, which hath ben the cheifest 
cause of his stay; and one other, his sendinge for the two regimentes of 
Spaniards lefte behinde him ; he hath not yet obbtayned any place of retreate ; 
and because he should not put garrison into La Fere, the Dake of Maine did 
pollitickly place his Avief and children in that towne, and seemeth not wiUinge 
to deliver any townes into his handes ; as by manie letters of his written to his 
privatt freindes, and intercepted, maniefestly appeareth. 

It is advertised that the Duke of Parmas armye consisteth of 13,000 foote, 
and 5,000 horse, or rather neare 6,000 ; and that the infection of sicknes is very 
greate in his campe, wherof the moste of the Popes army are saied to be dead. 



258 [January^ 

The Duke marcheth out with 100 cannon, and intended to succor the towne 
of Roan before the Kinges forces should assemble, which he cannot nowe 
performe ; and the Kinge with moste of his cavellerie resolveth to fight daiely 
with some of his troupes, and to waiet uppon his armye att his rysinge and 
lodginge, and to cutt of his victuells from him, and to spoile and harrie his 
countrey throughe which he muste march, and also to stopp his passage over 
the watter ; for which purpose aU his army of Reyters lodge aboute Beauvois, 
which way the Duke of Parma must needs march. 

The countreies of Artoys and Hennault refuse to ayde the Duke of Parma in 
this warre againste the French Kinge and many of his arriere bands are 
retourned againste his wUl. 

He muste daylie be famished with 100,000 of bredd for his armye; and 
Beauvoys and the rest of the leaguer townes cannott yeald him above 15,000 
a daie, which will also be for the most parte intercepted ; so that we cannott 
yet comprehend howe he and his army should passe to succor Roan without a 
bateU ; and the Kinge will not give him battell untill he be neare Roan and 
the Duke of Parma be ingaged to fight, and then he muste be forced to raise 
the seege, or ells he wilbe to weake to encounter the enemie. This is my 
greatest feare and my poore opinion, which I humbly submitt to your Honors 
better judgement. 

Your Honor I knowe hathe by this tyme hearde of the Kings losse of St. 
VaUery, which is saied to be recovered by the enemie by scaUado, It is so 
neare Deepe as the winde will forciblie carrie that newes. The importance of 
the place your Honor better knoweth then myselfe. 

Out of Germany it is advertised that the princes ther of the ReUigion growe 
coldly afiected therunto since the death of the Duke of Saxe, in whose coun- 
trey the Calvanists reUigion is nowe abbolished, and ther Chancelor, the cheife 
mainteynor therof, imprisoned, with the Secretary and others. 

Other newes I have none wourthy your Honors advertiesment, wherfore I 
moste humbly take my leave, with offer of my beste service to your employ- 
ment, and humblie beseech your Honor to accompt of me as 

Your most bounden and ready 

to obey and serve you, 

Henry Unton. 



A. D. 1592.] 259 



CXXXVI. 

1592, 

7 Jan. " From the Lords ; receaved the 28th." 

After our harty commendations to your Lordship. You shall receave 
herewithall a petition exhibited to us by George Hanger, Robert Dawlorne, 
and other ther portiners, marchants of the cyttie of London, wherby it shall 
appeare unto you howe hardley they have ben delt withall by a sentence 
given in Deepe verie lately againste them, wherby a shipp apperteyninge to 
them with the goods and ladinge, beinge taken on the seas by men of Deepe, 
and , brought to that porte, bathe ben ajudged to be good prize and ther 
goods confiscatt, notwithstandinge they had passe from me, the lord Admirall, 
which was shewed and produced there. Seinge therfore this straite and 
harde corse of proceedinge held in that corte againste her Majesties subjectes, 
beinge marchants of the cittie of London, knowen to be of good sorte and well 
aflfected, wee have caused the Ambassador heare to be dealte withall, and 
Monsr. de Plesis, in their behalfe ; who hath promised at his retoume to doe 
his best indevor that the sentence, wrongefullie strained and given againste 
them, may be by order of the Kinge and his counsell repealled, and restitution 
made of their ship and goods. 

Wee have thought good also, for their further good and expedition in their 
just cause, to require your Lordship, in her Majesties name, to deale very 
earnestly, as well with the Kinge himselfe as with some of the cheefest of his 
counsell, to whome the cause shalbe referred, in such sorte as her Majesties 
subjectes havinge passe from me, the lord Admirall, and tradinge by leave and 
licence, maie not thus injuriously be dealt withall, but that present order may 
be given for restitution of their ship and goods, or such dewe satisfaction 
made for these goods already sould as shall countervale the juste valine of the 
same. 

Herin praying your Lordship to use the best meanes in furtheringe their 
juste sute, we bidd your Lordship right hartely farewell. 



260 [January, 

From the Corte at Whitehall, the seaventh of January, 1591. 

Your Lordships verie lovinge freinds, 

Will. Bueghley, Char. Howard, 

Henery Hunsdon, W. Cobham, Tho. Buckhurst, 

Tho. Henage, Joh. Fortescue, 

Jo. WOLLEY. 



CXXXVII. 

1592, 

9 Jan. " To the Lords above mentioned.'' ^ 

It maie please your Lordships to understand that your letters of the 19th and 
23th of December, I receaved the 9th of this moneth at one instant ; and 
accordinge to the contentes therof I failed not to performe what your Lordships 
required me, concerninge the Earle of Essex retourne, and I procured also the 
French Kinge to be a furtherer therof, accordinge to your directions. But his 
Lordship needed no longe laborious perswasion therin, for he was verie well 
inclyned of himselfe to retourne, as maie appeare by his shorte stale here and 
the dilligence he usethe in his journey. 

The aproachinge of the Duke of Parma, and the opinion conceaved of a 
battaile did some what amuze him ; yett was he willinge to laie aside aU other 
respectes to conforme himselfe to her Majesties pleasure and your Lordships 
desires. And the Kinge, thoughe he be loath to leave his companie, yett 
shewed himselfe to be a carefall furtherer of his retourne. 

I neade not delate hearof. His Lordships owne presenc will speake sufi&amp;ci- 
ently for himselfe ; wherfore I leave further to trouble your Lordships at this 
present. And so moste humbly take my leave. 
From Goumay, the 9th of January, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comand, 

Henry Unton. 

' The original of this letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 261 



CXXXVIII. 

1592, 

10 Jan. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Mr. Harecort." 

My very good Lord. By the postcript of your letter of the 23th of 
December, written with your owne hande, I perceive howe her Majestic 
misliketh the cominge of Du Plessis, and that it will rather oflFende then profitt. 
Also your Lordship dothe therin advertise me of her Majesties offence con- 
ceived for my permittinge and not reprehendinge of the Earle when he ad- 
ventureth his person. 

For the first, I proteste I used all possible meanes to the Kinge and his 
counsell, and to himselfe, to procure his staie ; insomuch as ever since I have 
ben heild suspected and condemned to be a minister that dothe use all badd 
offices betweene her Majestic and the Kinge, wherof I have secret advertise- 
ments by some nearest aboute him, yett dothe the Kinge desemble it in owt- 
warde shewe, as much as he can. 

For the other, I appeale to Sir Roger Wilhams testimony and many others, 
whether I have not ben present myselfe of pourpose in his greatest adventures 
to diswade him, and forceably to deteyne him ; and when I could not prevaile, 
have pressed the Kinge to make stay of him, which he hath donne accordingly, 
and for the which my lord of Essex hath ben moste bitterly offended with 
mee. Wherfore my humble sute to your Lordship is that you wilbe pleased 
to give her Majestic satisfaction herein, and to pacefie the saied offence againste 
me. 

The Duke of Parma marcheth, and intendeth to take the way of Amyens, 
ther to leave his baggage that he may make the more dilligence to succor Roan. 
He hathe the longer delaied the journey in hope to possesse himself of La 
Fere and other places, and thincketh to make moste profitt of the Leaguers 
greatest necessities. If he had marched towards Roan imediately uppon the 
first arryvall, he had both raised the seege and prevented the assembly of the 
Kino's forces ; but his delaye hathe ben profitable to the Kinge ; and he wiU 
nowe be able to give battaile to the Duke of Parma, and in the meane season 
will waite uppon him with 4,000 horse, towards whom he marcheth this day. 



262 [January, 

and we shall lodge at a village within a league of Grandville, and tomorrowe 
the Kinge meaneth to lodge within 6 leagues of the Duke of Parma, who is 
nowe aboute Chaune, three leagues on this side Noyon, where he staieth untill 
Tewsday night next. 

The garrisons of Noyon, Chompeigne, and Chauney doe dayely take 
prisoners of the enemie as they are foraginge, and kill many of them, insomuch 
as the enemy dareth not sturr much from their quarter ; soe that their horses 
die for wante of forrage and their men for wante of victuell, in respecte the 
countrey is so much harried and wasted; wheruppon manie companies of 
Wallons and Spaniards are disbanded and retoumed without pasport. The 
reste that staie disUke of their treatement, and the French Leaguers, if they 
finde any of them strangers of the Duke of Parmas forces, do kiU them, and 
spoile them, allowinge it to be good prize, and so doe the others the like to 
them. I have spoke with a Spaniarde lately taken prisoner, who afErmeth 
that they have not had more then 2 dollers paie these 14 monethes, and it is 
fyve monethes since they receaved it. 

The Duke of Parma hath sent back his owne regiment, with certeine com- 
panies of Wallons; the reason wherof we cannot yet comprehend. And his 
other two regiments which he lately sent for, are saied to come to him. Moste 
of the Itallian companies are decayed, yett doth the Duke of Montemartiano 
contend greately for authoryty, and refuseth to obey ; pretendinge he hath 
speiciale comission so to doe, and refuseth to come to the Duke when he is 
sent for. He hathe sent to the Pope expreshe, and praieth that as Generall 
for the Churche he may be preserved. Maddam Balligny hath ben lately with 
the Duke of Maine, and hath negotiated with him at large aboute the treatie of 
peace, wherof the Duke of Parma is very jallous ; and he and the Duke of 
Maine doe verie much disagree. The French Kings Leaguers doe all growe 
in hatred of the Spanishe forces, and three regiments of foote are lately revolted 
from them, as it is reported. 

The forces of the Duke of Savoye are saied to be defeated in Languedocke, 
and he himselfe is gone into Spaine, some saie in respecte of the greate 
rebellion in Aragonne, wher 5,000 are saied to rebell ; others imagine his 
gpinge to be in respect the Kinge of Spaine would have him retourne into his 
countrey and no longer to patronise the warres ther, accordinge to my former 
advertisements ; but hereof we have noe assured advice. 

The cittie of Carcassonne is saied to be surprised by the enemie in respecte 



A. D. 1592.] 263 

of the greate plague and mortallitie ther, which made the forces of the Kinge 
to abandon it; but it is advertised that the castle, which is verie stronge^ 
dothe holde out for the Kinge, to the succor wherof Memorancy is gone. The 
Bange will not confesse that the towne is loste, but I feare it is trewe. Your 
Lordship knowes that Carcasonne hath two great townes in it; the one 
called the higher towne the other the lower. The Spaniards have had one of 
them these two yeares, and as it is advertised we have nowe taken the other ; 
but if the castle holde out we have good hope of the recovery therof. The 
losse of it will be of verie greate importaunce. 

It is advertised out of Brittaigne that the Prince D'Ombes and Sir John 
Norrys are joyned with the Prince County to make hedd to the Duke Mercu- 
ries forces. 

Our seege of Roan goeth verie slowely forward, for since the Kings depar- 
ture they have donne nothinge. The Marshall alleageth for his excuse wante 
of foote, and that his regiments of foote are for the moste parte disbanded. 
The Kinge hath sent theither all the foote which Laverdine brought and Mon- 
taguy, whose troupes were verie fare ; and as fast as any more cometh he 
sendeth them ymediatly to Roan, retyninge all the horse with himselfe. 

So leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, remittinge the state of things 
here more largely to be discuste on by my Lord of Essex, I moste humbly 
take my leave. 

From Goumey, this 10th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comande, 

Hexry Unton. 



CXXXIX. 



1592. 

10 Jan. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Mr. Harecort." 

Your Honors letter, without date, I receaved the 9th of this moneth, as also 
her Majesties letter directed to my Lord of Essex, at the receipte wherof his 



264 [January, 

Lordship was present at my lodginge ; and he findinge, uppon the breaking 
upp of my packett, a letter directed to him, did snatch it from me before I had 
perused your letter, so that I could not make such staie of her Majesties 
letter in my hands as your Honor directed ; wherfore I hope you will pardon 
this accident, and holde me blamelesse wherin I did not willingly ofFende. 
The packett was brought to me by one of his servants, who came with him, 
and delivered it mee in his presence, for the messenger would come no further 
then the Campe before Roan. The expectation of a battaile, and the approch- 
inge of the Duke of Parnia, my lord of Essex coulde not well digeste a longe 
tyme, att the length by the Kings earnest request, and urginge of him, which I 
procured, he relented and shewed all willingnes to retoume. He doubted 
greatelie his honor would be called in question by this manner of departure in 
this tyme, yett resolved in the ende to preferr her Majesties pleasure and will 
before all other worldlie respectes whatsoever ; and the shorte aboade he 
maketh here, and the greate diUigence he intendeth, will sufficiently manifest 
his willingnes to obey her Majestie. 

I may not forgett to lett your Honor knowe howe much he is inwardely dis- 
contented with some disgrace as he saieth her Majestie hath lately caste uppon 
him ; which his countenaunce dothe sufficiently bewray. Also he suspecteth 
my Lord your father hath not so much favored him in his absence as he ex- 
pected. This I thought good to imparte to your Honor, hopinge it shall onley 
remaine to yourselfe, but I proteste he is infinitly discontented. 

He maketh manie honorable offers to me of his favors and freindship, but I 
depende more uppon her Majesties goodnes then his mediation. He bathe 
sufficiently tasted of the misserie of this countrey, and saieth he therfore 
pittieth my expence and unpleasant dwelUnge here. I love not to complaine 
or to shewe any manner of unwillingnes to staie, so longe as I male doe her 
Majestie service, and duringe this seege of Roan ; and my confidence is in her 
Majesties gratious consideration of me. When tyme shall serve your 
honorable opinion and furtherance, I crave for my good, and so I will humbly 
take my leave, referringe your Honor to my letters to my lord Threasurer for 
newes. 

From Goumay, the 10th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Honors to comand, 

Henry Unton, 



A. D. 1592.] 265 



CXL. 

1592, 

16 Jan. " From the lord Threasurer; receaved the 28th, by 

Capten Hewes." 

My lord Ambassador, I thincke it good to make you privey what letters I 
have of late receaved from you. 

The laste is of the 10th of Januarie ; the nexte before it, of the 9th, was 
directed to my lord Admirall, my lord ChamberUne, and me. By the former 
we understand that, accordingeto our letters of the 19th and 23th of the laste 
moneth, you did your beste to perswade the Earle of Esses to retoume, 
wheras it seemeth he was verie well enclyned of himselfe ; and thoughe the 
approache of the Duke of Parma and an opinion conceaved of a battaile did 
some what amaze him, yett he did dispose himselfe to the comande, so as he 
arrived here at the Corte yesterday. And herwith I am commanded by her 
Majestie to charge you with an oversight in sufferinge the Earle of Essex to 
see her Majesties letters which were sent to you by my sonne. Sir Robert 
Cecyll, with expresse direction not to deliver the same to him, excepte you 
finde him utterly unwillinge to come. And thoughe by your owne writinge it 
appeareth that the Earle tooke occasion to gett the letters into his hands 
before you had redd your owne, which conteined that direction, yett her 
Majestie is no way satisfied therwith, so as (notwithstandinge the Earle him- 
selfe confessed that he tooke occasion to gett the letters out of your hands, as 
yourselfe dothe write,) her Majestie contynueth her opinion to blame you that 
you, beinge her Ambassador and a Counsellor (so of trust,) would suffer any 
person to take anie letter out of your hande in such sorte as this bathe ben 
donne by the Earle ; and I thincke my sonne. Sir Robert Cecyll, will write in 
like sorte unto you, with howe her Majestie hathe ben somewhat offended for 
sendinge that letter unto you, wherof noboddie was privie but her Majestie, 
myselfe and he ; and yett in truth he had good reason for his defence. 

Her Majestie is well pleased with your excuse for that shedid heretofore blame 
you, as not diswadinge the Kinge from sendinge Monsr. de Plessis, for that it 
appeareth by a letter of the French Kinges to his Ambassador here, that he 

M M 



266 [January, 

hathe taken it somewhat unkindely, and in a manner with some suspicion of 
lacke of your good will in that you refused, at the Kings requeste, to write 
heither for more succors ; so as in that parte you stand cleare with her 
Majestic. And I have imparted my mynde so to the French Ambassador for 
your excuse towards the French Kinge, as he will satisfie the Kinge to be 
voide of all suspicion towards you. 

Att this tyme her Majestic hathe commanded my lord Admirall and me to 
sende awaye for her pynnases and ordenance, beinge in the ryver Sene, if the 
French King will not victuell them, wherof the Lord of Essex saieth he spake 
with the French Kinge, who promised to see them victueled, and so the Earle 
saieth he lefte order with you to remember the Kinge ; wherof I doubt not of 
your parte for the remembrance to the Kinge, althoughe I knowe not howe 
it is performed ; which if it be not, you may doe well to lett the French Kinge 
understande that the thinge beinge impossible for her Majestic to victuell them 
there out of England, and yet eassie for the French Kinge to performe, if he 
will have the service of them, he muste of necessitie comande them to be 
victualled ; which may be doen by his direction to the Marshall of Byron. 

Your advertisement of the Duke of Parmas intent to take his way by 
Amyens is to me confirmed this day by an espeiall that I have had in his army, 
havinge reporte of divers other things, wherewith I will acquaint you ; thoughe 
by that tyme they come to you, they may be tryed howe trewe they are. 

The Spaniards have receaved three monethes wages, and the Wallons have 
not one monethes, which hath caused a greate parte of them to retoume by 
stealleth, wherby many of them that have not passed by woods but by townes 
have ben hanged. 

The Duke hath brought out from Landersey fifteene peeces of cannon, 
havinge lefte fyve in La Fere. He carrieth with him 3,000 charrets laden with 
certeine peeces of woode ' quilz appelent le ponton, pour faire de pontz. Et 
laultres disent cest pour se parquer, le jour quilze donnent battaille.' 

The Duke did of late incampe before CapeUa, and retired fi-om thenc without 
batterie ; after that he came to Quintins, where Mounsr. de Humeres and 
Monsr. de Mony were, who caused them also to retyre bothe by meanes of 
greate shott and by issuinge of some cavallerie ; and after that they attempted 
the like at Corbey, where also they did not rest, but (as my spie dothe 
advertise) ment to attempte Mondidier or Perone. They doe cause a bruite to 
be raised in their campe that they doe looke for 10,000 Almaines. 



A. D. 1592.] 267 

The principall heddes over the forces are the Duke of Parma, the Prince of 
Ascoley, the Prince of Chinay, the Marquis of Geraste, the Counte Charles 
Manfeild, and Monsr. La Motte ; and for the French the Dukes of Maine, of 
Guise and Nemors, les Seigneires de Rhosne, de St. Pol, and de Chastie. I 
am also informed that Maddame Ballany went to the Kinge to obteine a 
grawnte of newtraUitie. 

It is also advertised that the Popes nephewe findeth a greate nomber of his 
Itallians departed, partely from lacke of paie, and partely for sicknes. 

These kinde of advertisements I doe deliver you in acquittall of yours ; al- 
thoughe when they shall come unto you they wUbe of smale valewe, but 
thereby I am bould to provocke you to continewe your advertisements heither. 
And so havinge noe other matter to imparte unto you, and with opinion that 
by your freinds from hence you are advertised sufficiently of our pettie matters, 
I make an end. 

From the Corte, 16th January, 1591. 

Your Lordships very lovinge freinde, 

Will. Burghley. 

[Postscript.] 

I knowe not howe you are advertised of a strange accident in Scotland this 
Christmas tyme ; but this I shall write unto you shortely is trewe. 

Uppon the Munday, as we accounte it, this last Christmas at night, the 
Earle Bothwell, a proclaimed traitor, entred by a posteme gate to the Kings 
pallace at Hallyroode house, with 60 persons armed, aboute eight of the clocke 
when the Kinge had supped, he beinge privately retired to the Queene, and 
attempted the breakinge upp of the Kings chamber doores to have seised of 
the Kings person ; and some other of his forces attempted the like of the lord 
Chancellors lodginge ; but by reason of a noise raised of ther cominge in, bothe 
the Kings doores and the Chancellors were well defended untill uppon the 
allarum that the towne of Edenburghe sente 1,000 men armed ; wherof the 
Earle and his complaceis havinge knowledge, fledd, and yett some nomber of 
them taken and slaine, and the next day 8 or 9 of them hanged ; and on the 
Kings parte one onley slaine, and some others hurte. 

There was noe man of nobilUty or marke with the Earle in outwarde action, 
but the Earle of Morton's eldeste sonne, called by his marriage the Lord of Spott. 
There are divers others and some of the nobillitie suspected to be favorers of 



268 [January, 

this traiterous action, uppon opinion for a hate to the ChanceUor. One prin- 
cepall man, caUed the lord of Netherye, flyinge into England, is taken in Nor- 
ham, and their staled, and so shalbe aU others that can be found. 

I forgot to advertise you of the States determination to sende to the ayde 
of the French Kinge aboute tenne companies, to the nomber of 3,000 men, 
under the leadinge of the Counte PhiUip of Nassau and under him the 
Colloneil BouflFon. Herof I doubt not but Monsr. Buzenvall dothe advertise 
the Kinge, and yett I thincke it not superfluous to doe the like unto you. 

To the right honorable my verie good and lovinge 
freinde, Sir Henry Unton, Knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador in France. 



CXLI. 

1592. 

16 Jan. " From Mr. Vicechamberiine ; by John Mussy. " 

Sir. Yours from Gizors of the 6th of this January I received, wherin I 
finde your acknowledgement of my good wiU, that shall prove no lesse to you 
then I have promised ; and your readines to geive satisfaction bothe in your 
advertisement of the state of things there, and otherwise, which I have cause 
to thancke you for, and to thincke my selfe behotddinge to you accordinglie. 
But if you fynd (as perhappes you may have cause to suspect,) that this 
expressinge of your love to me may be any repressinge of better meanes to 
make your good service the more acceptable, you shall beste please me to 
doe that which shalbe moste profitable for your selfe ; for as I was never 
more hungrie to embrace the busines of procuringe the intelligences of the 
world then her Majestie hath commanded me, and my place requireth, so lacke 
I not meanes to come by the understandinge of such things as behoveth me 
to knowe, without doinge any prejudice to any that I love. Wherfore write 
and forbeare, as occasions and cause shall leave you best reason, and you 
shall finde me neither to stande uppon complementes nor to use anie thinge 
that cometh from you but as male be best for you, and as yourselfe woulde 
have me. 



A. D. 1592.] 269 

Now the presente cause of my sendinge this bearrer is, to be informed of 
the purpose and procedinge of the Kinge and of the Duke of Parma, who 
beinge bothe greate Captens, and drawinge their armes into the field, dothe 
leave an expectation in the worlde that they will not parte without blowes. 
What you thincke therof, as well as what you knowe, I wishe to heare, and 
desire to knowe from you wherin I may stand you in any steed ; and so 
shall you finde me bothe wiUinge and ready to performe the office of a friende 
to you, uppon all occasions, to whom I moste hartely comend me and wishe 
as to my selfe. 

At the Corte, the 16th of January, 1591. 

Your freind assuredly, 

Tho. Henage. 
To the right honorable my verie good freinde. 
Sir Henry Unton, Knight, Ambassador for the 
Queens Majestic in France. 



CXLII. 

1592, 

18 Jan. " To the lord Threasurer ; by a servante of the Kings." ' 

Albeit I did verie lately write to your Lordship from Bretteul of the Kings 
journey since his departure from Gournay, the rumer of the Popes death, of 
the greate levye earnestly laboured in Germanic by the Kinge of Spaine and 
his instruments for the invasion of England (which was then by them refused, 
yett were they still soUicited,) of the speach of the Duke of Parma at Morent 
that he resolved to attempte the conquest of England after his gayninge of the 
battell here or succor of Roan, of the rendringe La Fere unto the Kinge of 
Spaine, and the placinge garrison ther of 3 companies of Lansequenetts, who 
made oathe to the Kinge of Spaine, for the which Monsr. de Maine had 5,800 
crownes, of the Duke of Parmas armie, which consisted of 14,000 foote, 
' The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



270 [January, 

wherof 2,000 are French, and of 4,500 horse, wherof the French are not 1,000, 
— all which advertisements I had receaved from him whom I employed to the 
Duke of Parmas armie, who remaineth ther unsuspected, and is of verie good 
sufSciencie and honestie, — yett fearinge the miscarringe of my pacquettes, 
which happen daily to the Kinge and the league, I thought it necessary not onley 
in this of myne to repeate the effect of my former advertisements conteyned 
more at large in my letters of the 14th of this moneth from Bryteulj but also 
to add such others as I have since receaved, knowinge your Lordship dothe 
expecte contynuall letters, in this tyme specially. 

The rumor of the Popes death contineweth in the enemies campe, and of the 
intended invasion of England this next sommer ; and not only the intended 
invasion of England, but also the intended leavy in Germanic for the Kinge of 
Spaine is solhcited, wherof ther is noe greate likeliehoode ; and the Prince of 
Anhalt is so nowe advertised by letters of verie greate credit, which letters he 
receaved since my last dispatch, and hath sente me a letter directed to her 
Majestie conteyninge (as he saieth) such advise, and noe other matter of 
importaunce, which I sende here inclosed. The rendringe of La Fere is 
confirmed in such manner as I before advertised, and the state of the Duke of 
Parmas armie. The two regiments of mutynous Spaniards do contynewe in 
the Lowe Countries, and shall not departe butt uppon greate necessitie. 

The 15th we departed firom Britteul, and retourned to Somoreu fyve leagues 
distant from Britteul, withoute viewe of enemies or aUarum, and we continued 
our gards of this side the ryver in viewe of the enemy ; we surprised their 
sentynells, we tooke many prisoners in forraginge, defeated some of ther 
troupes of horse, which they sent to discover; and if the enemie had not 
broken downe the bridge at Morent, some of our horse had geven into ther 
campe at night ; so we returned without losse, and have since remained at 
Somereul expectinge the Duke of Parmas dislodging, and this dale we came to 
this towne to be nearrer to him. 

The duke of Parma hath continewed at Morent since Sondaie last was 
sevenight, where he incamped himselfe moste strongly ; for he fortified himselfe 
with his waggons with his sackes, wherof it is saied he hath brought 6,000, 
which are necessarie for his beseeginge of towns. He intrenched himselfe, he 
planted aU his Artillerie for his defence, he lodgeth all his horse within his 
infantery ; and did not only breake downe the bridge of Morent but intrenched 
everie forde aboute the river that was passable. The Kings cominge did 



A, D. 1592.] 271 

greately amaze him, and did alter his resolution to marche, especially to wards 
Beavois ; he never marcheth above two leagues a daie in respecte of his 
carriages, which are saied to be sixe tymes as troublesome as his armie ; he 
never cometh neare any wood but he maketh a staye of 3 houres, fearinge some 
ambuscados of the Kings and some treason of the French that are with him, in 
whom he hathe noe greate confidence. In his marche he comandeth Monsr. 
de Maine to take the vantgard, intendinge he shall first ronne fortune, and 
will not suffer anie horse but 20 or 30 to marche before his foote ; so the Bange 
will hardley fight with his horse but with greate disadvantage. He hathe noe 
greate capten with him but La Motte, and therfore taketh very greate paines 
himselfe, and is never from his army. 

This daye it is thought he dothe march, for he sent some of his infanterie 
before to Alley ; his resolution as yett is to march by Amiyens and Abbevylle 
towards St. Vallerye, and Crotteau, both which are promised to be dehvered 
into his hands, and from thenc he will goe to beseege Deepe, or directly to 
Roan. He demandeth Newhaven, and greate feare is conceived that it shalbe 
dehvered to him ; or ells receive some of his companies. And the Kinge is 
advertised that 1,500 Spaniards are either embarqued, or ready to embarque, 
at Nantes, of those which were with the Duke Mercury, who hath broken his 
armye expreslie for that purpose, and then shall they either come to joyne 
with the Duke of Parma or indevor to caste themselves into Roan before his 
cominge, which the Kinge saieth he will prevent. Of these conjectures we can 
assure nothinge, but much is conceived by the Kinge. 

Others doe assuredly beleive that the Duke of Parma dothe onley temporise 
to wearie out the Kings nobillity, knowinge they cannott nor will not contynewe 
at the most two monethes with the Kinge after ther arryvaU, and that either 
the Reyters wiU mutyne or his infantery before Roan disbande, which they doe 
dayley; and this opinion is the most probable; all which I leave to your 
Lordships grave consideration. 

The Kinge is verie diligent, painefull, and vigiUent, and resolveth not to 
fight in grosse without his infantery; and imediatly after that he is assured of 
the Duke of Parmas course by his marche, he wiU retyre towards Roan, and 
attend some fitt place neare it to offer the Duke of Parma batteU. He hath 
sente the Governor of Deep before to possesse Roan, which, as your Lordship 
knoweth, is newter, and rendereth it selfe to the first comer. This the Kinge 
dothe to prevente the enemye thereof, and meaneth hkewise to keepe him from 



272 [January, 

Aumale, and he meaneth to viewe the Duke of Parmas ^larch, which he male 
safely performe ; and if they marche not close, to cutt of some of their troupes 
of horse ; this is all he can doe. 

The moste parte of the Kings forces are joyned with him, and the Marshall 
of Aumont wilbe with the armye within foure dales, and Monsr. la TremoviUe 
aboute the same tyme. Also the Duke of BouiUion makethe all dilUgence to 
come, and in his journey hath defeated in Champagne St. Pol and three regi- 
ments of foote and some horse. The advertisement is that 300 weare deade in 
the place and as many taken prysonners, the rest defeated and St. Pol himselfe 
forced to flye to Soissons. They did encounter by chaunce the one cominge 
to the Kiiige the other to the league. This is credibUe adv^tised, yett dare I 
not assure it. 

The two dutchesses of Longeville are ransomed at 75,000 crownes, and the 
exchange of Tavannes, and are dehvered out of Amyens. All the Governors 
for the league in Pycardie have vowed to defende one another and to deliver 
none of ther townes to the Spaniards ; especially Peron utterly refuseth to 
suffer any to enter. This rendringe of La Fere, and the sale therof dothe 
much discontente them. Monsr. de Nemors groweth discontented, and 
refuseth as yett to attende the Duke of Parma ; he saieth he will stand of 
himselfe. 

Out of Brittaigne it is advertised that the Dutchesse of Mercuric is dead, 
who did much governe her husband, and was passionate for the league. By 
her death some hope is conceaved her Jiusband may be the better reconciled 
to the Kinge. 

Yesterday the Kinge went a league from Somery to vissit Madame Ballagny, 
who pretendeth a power in herselfe to conclude a peace betweene the Kinge and 
Monsr. de Maine, and under this couUor she woidd serve her turne of the 
Kinge to capitulate with him for her husband and the towne of Cambray, that 
they might remaine newter, and keepe the county of Marie and such other 
places as they have, which apperteyneth to the Kinge. So the Kinge hathe 
differed her to his counsell, and dothe temporise with her onley to keepe 
Ballagny from the league ; but he hathe, as he saieth, neither hope of peace 
nor of any good by concludinge with Ballagny. It pleased him to take me 
with him and to acquainte me with this much himselfe; assuringe me he 
would conceale nothinge from mee. 

Uppon the speech of the breakinge of the Duke of Mercuries armye I did 



A. D. 1592.] 273 

move the Kinge that the Prince Conty and his forces, ■nho are joyned with the 
Prince D'Ombes, might continewe to make warr in Bryttayne, and not omitt 
this opportunyty, which he hathe promised, and hath sent suche order and 
comandemente, as he saithe, accordingly. 

Out of the Lowe Countreys the Kinge is advertised that the States will 
sende him 3,000 foote. His infantery wilbe to weake to encounter the Duke 
of Parmas. He will not be diswaded from the like hope out of England of 
infanterie, and hathe required me very earnestly to move her Majestic that Sir 
William Sackvyll may have a regiment and a companie, if her Majestie please 
to send any. He saied also he would write soe much to her Majestie. 
He greately esteemeth Sir WUl. SackvyU for his vaUour and vertues, and useth 
him as well as any of his owne nation in outwarde shewe. I muste needs 
confesse he hath gained here verie great honor and reputation, and will prove 
a verie wourthy gentleman ; but I leave him, and the Kings earnest request 
from him, to her Majesties gratious pleasure and to your Lordships con- 
sideration. 

The 10th daie of February stilo novo is greately expected by the Reyters, 
and the Prince Anhalt resolveth to departe if the Kinge breake that promise ; 
yett dothe he make no doubt of the Kings paiement, because Monsr. de la 
Tremoville is reported to bring 50,000 crownes with him, and the Kinge 
dothe constantely afi&amp;rme to the Prince Anhalt and me that he shalbe provided 
againste the day, or with in 5 or 6 daies after. The Prince of Anhalt will not 
pay himselfe with the hope of Roan, and taketh her Majesties messuage sente 
him by me in the best parte. If he be not verie much abused he will 
contynewe ; and this next paiement beinge performed, he will stale untill 
Midsomer. I hope the best ; thoughe I feare the Kings povertie. And the 
Reyters have generally allowede of the last offer of the King. ' 

The Prince of Anhalt is advertised that the Duke Maurice of Saxe, who 
servede the Kinge of Spaine in the Lowe Countreis, and comanded over a 
regiment of Lansquenetts, is seized prisoner by them revoltinge against him. 
He is also advertised that Collonell Eckenberger hath longe endevored to make 
a levy of Reyters for the service of the Kinge of Spaine, which hath ben 
impeached by the Duke Casymyre and the Marquis of Onspach. 

Thus lea\ inge farther to trouble your Lordship, cravinge pardon for my 

' This last sentence is not in the Bodleian copy. 
N N 



274 [January, 

overmuch length in respecte of the matter, and for my hasty scriblinge in 
respect of wante of leisure and want of place and necessary meanes, I most 
humbly take leave. 

From Pay" the 18th of January, 1591. 

Your Lordshipes to comande, 

Henry Unton. 

I may not forgett to let your Lordship knowe 
that my lodginge was broken open, all my 
money taken from me,'' and my apparell, that 
I was stripped into my shirte, and by Gods will 
hardlie escaped the cuttinge of my throate ; so 
that I was forced to be beholdinge to some 
French gentlemen for monie and apparell. It 
was donne in the night by souldiors and I was 
never in the like missery ; but I founde freinds 
and the Kinge moste gratious to me. 



CXLIII. 



1592, 

18 Jan. " Againe to the lord Threasurer ; by the same messenger. " ^ 

My verie good Lord. Since the closinge upp of my other longe letter, and 
as the Kinge was goinge to horse, Monsr. Grammont hathe assured him that 
the Duke of Parma hath passed over his artillerie on this syde of the river at 
Moreul, to come to Britteul, and so by Beauvois and alonge the forrest of 
Lyon, to goe in coverte as much as he male in respecte of the Kings horse, and 

1 In the original a blank is left for the place which has not been filled up, and the date is altered 
from the 18th to the 17th. See the commencement of No. CXLIX. 

' Afterwards thus altered in the original, " and I robbede of all my money." 
' The original of this letter is in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 275 

so directly to Roan to succor the towne, or ells resolved to accepte battell 
if the King offer it ; uppon which advise we are nowe departinge to Somme- 
riei and from thence to march with 4,000 horse to impeache his passage if we 
can ; which wilbe impossible. The Duke of Parma marcheth this dale after 
his artillerie, and will overtake it this night ; but where he will lodge we knowe 
not. 

Monsr. de Maine offereth nowe to conclude a peace with the Kinge, as Gram- 
mount writeth ; but for his reputation sayth he must be forced to attende the 
event of this battaile, and then protesteth he wiU refiise noe reasonable con- 
ditions. In the meane tyme he assureth the Kinge of his willingnes. All this 
I receave from the Kinge. He prepareth to give the Duke of Parma battell, 
and both beinge so resolved, we must leave the suscesse to God. The Kinge 
sendeth in all haste for the Marshall D' Omont and Monsr. de Boulhon, and 
thincketh within 14 dales to geve the battell. So beinge forced to end in 
all haste, I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Poix this 18th of January 1591. » 

Your Lordships to comand, 

Henry Unton. 



CXLIV. 

1592, 

19 Jan. " From Mr. Robert Cecyll the 28 ; by Peter Browne, the 

messenger." 

Sir Henry Unton, imediatly uppon my Lord of Essex his cominge over 
things calmed untill his Lordships relation was heard and his advice in favor 
of the Kings affaires was comitted to consultation. Since his arryvall also we 
hear that the States have yealded a verie honorable support to the Kinge. I 
doe imagine you will looke for newes of me of perticuler passages in corte ; for 
of the resolutions for the publicke my Lords letters conteine the substance ; 
' In the Bodl. MS. this letter is dated 19 January. 



276 [January, 

and as he takes care for your satisfaction and direction therin, so do I hearken 
after your perticular, and observe and apprehend all thinges that doe concerne 
you, or touch you. 

Your letters that answeared the delyverie of the Queenes letter to my Lord 
of Essex by chance of his presence in your chamber, came to my hands before 
my Lord of Essex arrived 24 houres ; for Galtryde your man was with my 
Lord on Thursday night and my Lord came not untill Saturday. 

Att the first the Queene was angrie that you would open her letter in anie 
place but privately, and said it was lacke of discretion, and would needs have 
my Lord to write to you of the error, but when my Lord Generall arryved he 
did verye nobly answeare that you could not avoide it, and that he did snatch 
it out of your hande ; and because the messenger delivered them in his pre- 
sence, he did himselfe tarrye by you till you had opened it. This hath made 
the matter passe away, and the Earle dothe besides wounderfully comend 
bothe your vallewe and sufficiencie to the Queene and to all others ; but for all 
that muste you not looke to wante backe freinds. His Lordship is in very 
highe grace with the Queene, and male with his presence (beinge so affectionat 
to the Kinge as he is) advance the aiFaires of France exceedingly. I must 
deale trewly with you, that you have fewe enemies, and therfore in your 
integretie of proceedinge, if you thus contynewe, noe doubt but her Majestic 
will encrease her estimation of you. Marry, in my opinion, as firste I would 
lesson my charge for the tyme beinge, so would I not avoyde any good meanes 
of retourne when with honor any oportunyty may be offered. Mr. Grimston 
is gon over, whoe male serve the Queene in this runinge campe aswell as a 
man of your worth, who cannott but lyve like your selfe. I am and wilbe ever 
yours in aU honest love and care to doe you best offices, accordinge, to my 
profession to you ever. And so I leave you. 
From the Corte, this 19th of January, 1591. 

Your lovinge freind to comande, 

Robert Cecyll. 



A. D. 1592.] 277 



CXLV. 

" From the Earle of Essex." 

My Lord ; I can send you no newes uponmy first arryvall, but ere it be 

longe I will send you that which I hope shall content you. I pray excuse me 

to the Kinge I write not. I have ben but one day, and have had smale 

leasure. By the nexte you shall heare more ; and so I rest your Lordships 

most sure freinde, 

Robert Essex. 



CXLVI. 

1592. 

19 Jan. "From the lord Threasurer; receaved the 29th. " 

My lord Ambassador. This bearrer, Mr Grimston, beinge a gentleman 
well knowen to your Lordship who hathe heretofore dilligentlie and carefuUy 
served her Majestic in these partes, beinge weary of his idle lief here hathe 
ben verie desirous to retourne backe theither to followe the warr, and to see 
the issue of this great action nowe in hande. And for that he is a person which 
maie happelie stande you in steede, as matters maie fall out, so doe I pray your 
Lordship to give him your favor and countenance ; and for his parte I doe 
assure myselfe, uppon the experience I have had of his former behavior, he 
will by all good meanes deserve the same. And therfore I hope, aswell for 
his owne deserte as this my comendation, he shall finde your freindshipp 
towards him. And so I comende me hartely to your Lordship. 

From the Corte, this 19th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships verie lovinge freinde. 

Will. Burghley. 
To the righte honorable my verie 
lovinge freinde, Sir Henry Unton, 
knight, her Majesties Ambassador 
in France. 



278 [January, 



CXLVII. 

1592, 

1 9 Jan. " To the Earle of Essex. " 

My verie good Lord. By my last of the 14th from Briteul, (beinge within 4 
leagues of Moreul, where the Duke of Parma hath lodged ever since Sondaie 
was sevenight) I did advertise your Lordship of our journey, and of such occur- 
rences as then came to my knowledge, as also of the particular estate of the 
Duke of Parmas armie; whereunto I referr your Lordship more at large, 
assuringe you his armye dothe not exceede 14,000 foote (wherof 2,000 are 
French,) and 4,000 horse, countinge carbines, and Monsr. de Maines French 
horse. 

The 15th we departed from Brieteul, havinge taken sent3aieUs and many 
forrages of the enemies, and defeated some of their horse, but not many, and 
the Kinge contejmed his gardes on this side of the river that we might 
veiwe the enemie ; who did breake downe the bridge of Moreul and in- 
trenched aU the fourds of the other side of the ryver that we mighte 
not geive into his quarter ; and in his incampinge and marchinge he covereth 
all bis horse with foote, and wiU not suffer above 30 at the moste to goe to 
discover. Neither dothe he as yett march att all from Moreul, and when he 
marcheth but a league a day. 

The French impute it to feare, but others conceave he dothe but temporise, 
to wearie out the Kings nobillitie and his forces, who (as your Lordship 
knoweth) will retourne when ther botteUs be emptie and their owne money 
spent, and this is moste probable. 

The Duke of Parma intendeth to passe by Amyens unto St. VaUery and 
Croteau, both which (as it is saied) shalbe deUvered to him, for his retraict ; 
and from thence it is saied and thought he will either beseege Deepe or goe 
directlieto Roan to succor it. And he expecteth 1,500 Spaniards out of Brit- 
tanie, who (it is saied) are already imbarqued at Nantes for that purpose, and 
the Duke Mercurys armye is broken. Some feare is conceaved of the 
receavinge of him or his garrison into New Haven. He hath seized uppon La 



A. D. 1592.] 279 

Fere and placed a garrison of his owne their, which towne Monsr. de Mayne 
hath sould him for 58^000 crownes, wherin the Viceseneshall of Moronte by 
Mar was the instmment. St. Pol hath receaved a greate overthrowe by 
Monsr. de Bouillion, they bothe matt by chance, either cominge with his 
armye to his partie, and 300 were lefte dead in the place of St. Poles com- 
panies, and as many taken presoners, and the rest defeated, himselfe retiringe 
to Soissons. He had 3 regements and 300 horse, as it is reported. This is 
crediblie bruted, but I dare not assure it. 

We retoumed the 15th to Somery, and there stayed untill yesterday, when 
as we came to this towne, and this day we goe backe to Somery, beinge 
so resolved since my beginninge of this letter ; the Kinge beinge advertised 
that the Duke of Parma will this day march from Moreul towards Beauvois 
and Goumey, and rather take that waie. He dothe every day change his 
resolution, and the Kinge will waiete uppon him accordingly. 

Soe beinge forced suddenly to departe, havinge nothinge ells worthie your 
Lordships advertisement, but that our assurance of battaile is noe greater then 
it was at your departure, that the twoe dutchesses of Longeville are delivered 
for Tavannes and 75,000 crownes besides, and that my lodginge was broken 
open in the night and I robbed of al my mony and apparell to my shirte, and 
forced to borrowe money and apparell, which I thincke was comitted by some 
of our owne gardes, — this beinge all I can nowe advertise, I moste humbly take 
my leave, with offer of my best service to your Lordships imployment, to 
whorae I have whollie devoted myselfe. 

From Poix, this 19th of January, 1591. 

Your Lordships wholly to comande, 

Henry Untox. 

The Kinge hath (since the writinge of this letter) receaved advertisement 
from Graumont to prepaire himselfe and his forces for the battaile within 14 
dales, for that the Duke of Parma is so resolved to fight or ells to succor Roan. 
He hath passed his artillery before him over the river and foUoweth after him- 
selfe ; wheruppon the Kinge maketh all preparation for a battaile, and sendeth 
in all haste for Monsr. Bouillion and the Marshall D'Omont, and intendeth to- 
morrowe to take viewe of the Duke of Parmas march with 4,000 horse, and to 
retire towards his forces and as neare Roan as he can to prevent the battell ; 
wherin the Kinge is verie resolute. It is thought that the Duke of Parma will 



280 [January, 

take the waie of the forrest of Lyon to come in coverte as neare as he can, in 
respecte of the Kinges strength of cavallerie and wante of foote. I have moved 
the Kinge to write of all thinges at large to your Lordship, which he promiseth. 
And so I moste humbly take my leave, beinge forced to change my advertise- 
ments accordinge to the Kings advise, in all hast, this 19th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comand, 

Henby Unton. 



CXLVIIL 

1592, 

25 Jan. " From the Lord Threasurer ; by John Symons. " 

My Lord Ambassador. I thincke it good to make you an accompte whatt 
letters I receive from you, because you may make accompte also howe your 
advertisements be brought hiether. 

Your last letters are of the 17th of this moneth, with a late peece of writinge, 
after written the 18th and the next before was of the 10th of January, from 
Gourney ; wherby I see that some other letters written from Briteul, (though 
I know not the date) wherof you make mention in these your last, are miscar- 
ried ; at the leaste not brought to my handes. And yett some satisfaction it is 
to me to perceive what was written in those letters by the recitaU in the last ; 
amonge the which the Popes death beinge mentioned, I finde a rumor therof 
confirmed by your late letters ; but because it is not advertised other waies out 
of Italey, I doubt therof; yett could I nowe be contented it were trewe, for by ; 
my letters out of Itallie in December I perceive the Spaniards have wonne him 
more to their bente then ther was expectation, insoemuch he hath yealded to 
contynue the paie to the Duke Monte Martiano for all the Itallian forces, 
thoughe not for the Swisses, pretending that with the paie of the Swisses 
ther might be founde twice as many Itahans. 

That which you write of 1,500 Spaniards that should come from Nantes to 
Newhaven or Roan is confirmed as to the number and the purpose, thoughe 
not for the place of ther embarquinge for, by letters from Sir John Norris out 
of Brittanie ; and should come to St. Mallowes, and ther take ther shippinge ; 
and if they shall come, indeed I feare the recoverie of Roan wilbe desperate. 



A. D. 1592.] 281 

especially if they bringe victualls with them ; for otherwise, consideringe the 
scarsitie that is seen to be allready in Roan, they shall doe more hm^te then 
good with ther presence. 

I forbeare to repeate your advertisements unto us which you have doen 
verie perticularly andjoumaUie, and therin dothe contente her Majestie well to 
see you to use such dilligence ; and yett her Majestie Uketh not you should 
adventure yourselfe in so many places as you doe, beinge ther as her Ambas- 
sador ; but if you should have any mishapp in such your adventures, her 
Majestie should, besids her greife of mynde, be touched in honor ; wherof you 
are to have regarde as much as of the suritie of your owne person. Onhe I 
finde lacke in your advertisements that the names of divers townes and places, 
botbe wher the Kinge and the Duke of Parma have lodged, are not expressed 
in any carte of Fraunch to be found, neither some of the rivers wherof you 
make mention, beinge (as it seemeth) but smale ; and therefore herafter I pray 
you, either by your letters or in some geogriphicaU tricke in a peece of paper, 
to make it appeare howe such obscure places and ryvers do lye and coste, and 
be distant from other greater townes expressed in the common cartes of 
France. 

You shall understand that Monsr. De Plesis hath ben staied verie longe at 
Dover, who carried answear from her Majestie not to his contentment; and 
nowe I perswade myselfe he is come to the Kinge ; with whome I sent letters 
to you, explayninge the Queenes Majesties answer and the causes therof. 
And in the meane tyme ther came thether, two daies paste, a speciall messen- 
ger from the French Kinge to his Ambassador, with letters from the Kinge, 
renewinge his former requeste which Du Plessis hadd dehvered ; but notwith- 
standinge anie motions made by the French Kinge, or reasons added therto by 
his Ambassador, her Majestie hath continewed in her former refusal}, addinge 
these reasons foUowinge, wherwith shee hath willed me to make you ac- 
quainted. 

The one is, because my Lord of Essex hath informed me that the Kinge 
meaneth to drawe himselfe nearrer to Roan, and ther expecte the approche of 
the Duke, wherby he may have the helpe of his army that consisteth of foote- 
men at Roan ; and in that respect her Majestie concludeth that he shall not 
have need of any further succors from thence. The seconde motive is, for that 
shee doubteth of further losse of her people by mortaUitie, consideringe howe 
many notable gentlemen are there dead without violence of warr ; and divers 

o o 



282 [January, 

since ther cominge home thether are dead and in danger, as Sir Phillip Buttler 
lately dead of a pestelent feavor, and the Lord Awdley nowe in danger of 
death, and divers others which have ben ther dailie fallinge sicke. And thirdly 
to all thereunto some others impediments she findethe by the Kings requeste 
to have these succors of pikes placed in the moste danger of batteU, as it were 
desperate, to have them caste away, as hetherto she hathe founde her people 
have ben putt to the most dangerous attempts. These and such like reasons 
her Majestic aUeaged ; but I thinke one of the greatest is, that by Captens 
that come from thence she findeth the generall opinion to be that Roan is not 
hkely to be recovered att all, by reason the Kinge suffered them all this sumer 
to strengthen themselves bothe with men and victualls, and with the fortifica- 
tion of the forte of St. Catherines ; which, if it had been attempted in July 
when her Majesties forces came over, might have ben recovered in one 
moneth, and longe before the Duke of Parmas armie could have come into 
France. I knowe the reasons will not be well accepted there ; but yett her 
Majestic hath comanded me to imparte them to you, to be used as you shall 
see cause. 

Her Majestic was much greived to perceive by the postscripte of your last 
letter, that your lodginge had ben broken open, and you robbed bothe of your 
monie and apparrell, which she did bothe pittie, and yett thought strange howe 
it should be doane, you havinge soe many servants, and occasion of necessitie 
to have the same garded, insoemuch as shee doubteth that some of your men 
might be giltye therof. I pray you therfore by your next, write to me the 
manner and circumstance therof, and what hope you male have of recoverie of 
your losses. 

And thus havinge att this present noe more, expectinge dailie to heare, but 
speciaUie desirous to be certefied of some good successe of the Kings estate 
there, I doe pray from the bottome of my harte with incessant praiers to 
Almightie God, the Lord of Hostes, to defend the justice of the Kings cause 
againste the mightie tyrants and Gods verie rebells. 

From the Corte at Westminster, the 25th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships moste assuredlie, 

To the right honorable, my verie William Burghley. 

lovinge freind, Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassador 
resident in France. 



A. D. 1592.] 283 



CXLIX. 

1592, 

26 Jan. « To the Lord Threasurer ; by Mr. Harte." i 

My verie good Lord. The 19th of this moneth, (which should have bene the 
trewe date of my laste letters of the 18th,) we retoumed to Sommereu to 
lodge ; where receaAringe certaine advertisements of the Duke of Parmas 
marchinge that daie, and passinge the river at Moreul, we prepared the nexte 
dale, beinge the 20th, to take vewe of his march and encampinge. And at two 
of the clocke in the mominge the Kinge, accompanied with 3,000 horse, 
marched towards the ennemye in battell, and when he came near Brytteul 
(which way he was perswaded the Duke of Parma would come,) he dressed an 
ambuscado for him, but perceivinge the enemies course to bende towards 
County, the Kinge went before his troupes with 10 horse only to discover, 
takinge me with him to see his dirrections, as he doth usually ; and by greate 
chaunce we fell uppon the enemie unadvisedly ; where, to disingage the Kinge, 
we were forced to charge some horse of the enemies verie unequally, but 
without greate losse, only Laverdins horse was shott, and he dismounted in 
greate danger to have ben taken. Wheruppon the Kinge sent for the rest of 
his troupes to give into their quarter, which he did performe onely with two 
troupes of horse, takinge sixe footemen prisoners; and so we retired that 
night to Songeon, four leagues and a halfe on this side Sommereu, where we 
staiedthe 21th to refreshe our horses, wherof they have neede, and the nexte 
daie departed to gaine this lodginge of Aumale, havinge advertisement the 
enemie intended to prevente us thereof; wheare we have con tine wed ever 
since, with resolution to dispute this lodginge with the enemie as longe as we 
cann, and the kinge hath everie daie gone to the warre, and yesterday with 
200 horse did take veiwe of the Duke of Parmas march and lodginge of his 
vantgard at Poix, which they quited uppon our approche, for 3 or 4 houres, 
but at length they returned and lodged there, where they stale aU. this day, 
beinge the 25th, resolvinge as yett to goe from Poix to Eu, alonge a brooke 
that goeth theither from Eu. It is more probable they will take that way 
of Eu then this of Aumale, and we muste retyre before them, to impeach 
their passage we cannott for wante of foote. Every night we lodge our 
' The origiaal of this letter is Id the State Paper Office. 



284 [January, 

gards verie neare, and surprise each others quarter, with losse of mene on both 
sides, and do skirmishe daylie with them, our only desire is to temporise 
untill the Kings forces be all come to him which are not as yett, and they 
make the more dilligence in respecte therof, and for feare of our greater sup- 
plies out of England and the Lowe Countries ; so that the battel! must nowe 
be geiven verie shortely, or Roan wilbe relieved. 

My last advertisement of the defieate of St Pol is confirmed, but Monsr. 
de Bouillion was not the executioner of it; and the Popes death is nowe 
helde to be doubtfull in the Duke of Parmas campe, but the defeate of the 
Duke of Savoye and of 1,000 of his horse is confirmede, wherof 120 were 
lefte dead in the place and 80 taken, (himselfe beinge ther in person hardley 
escaped,) and some of his artiUerie loste. 

Monsr. de Vallete with 500 horse waytinge for him in ambuscado did 
give him this overthrowe; for the which the town of Marseilles did make 
fires of joy e. 

The losse of Carcasone in Languedoc is also confirmed, and sixe companies 
of Spaniards are receaved into garrison there, so the Spaniard possesseth 
himselfe of townes in all parts of France, and in his owne ryght, not in the 
behalfe of the league. 

Madame BaUagny hath taken her leave of the Kinge and obtained surcease 
of armes for sixe monethes betweene him and her husband ; promisinge in the 
meane tyme to conclude a stricte accorde with the Kinge, and they of the 
towne oflferinge themselves into the Kings protection, with acknowledgment 
of him to be their sovereigne, which the Kinge hath accepted. But Ballangny 
for these sixe monethes remaineth newter and his garrison, expecting the 
event of this battell. Also it is accorded by articles in wrightinge, that 
BaUagny shall enjoye her revenuews in France quietHe duringe the saied sixe 
monethes, and the Kings subjects theirs in Cambrasy, and all other things, as 
the conty of Marie, to remaine in statu quo prius, without allowinge or dis- 
allowinge Ballagnys right. 

She hath also made a project for peace, assuringe the Kinge of the Duke 
of Maines forwardnes therin ; and demanded for him the Duchie of Burgondie ; 
reservinge the soveraingntie to the Kinge ; whereunto he made answere that 
his officers and the Duke of Maynes would never agree, and that the profitt 
therof was not yearely 50,000 crownes, he rather oifered to give the Duke of 
Mayne a pension of 100,000 crownes by the yeare, with good assurance, 
wherby aU other jallousies might be taken away; and that in lewe therof 



A. D. 1592.] 285 

Monrs. de Mayne, if he had creance, should conclude a generaU pease, or 
delyver Paris, Roan, Orleans and the townes in Pycardie into the Kings hands, 
which the Kinge is perswaded is rather in his power ; for that he hath in a 
manner absolute authoritie over them. 

The Kinge doth greatelie flatter himselfe with this hope of peace, and 
soe the Duke of Mayne maie receave good conditions; it is not doubted 
of his parte, in respecte of his inclination and dislike of the imperious 
comandinge of the Spaniarde and of their insolencie. If this battell be geven, 
it will give an end to some of their miseries ; for it is not only the blowe of 
Fraunce but in a manner of Cristiendome ; and Gods will be done with 
mercie. 

A divorce is practised betweene the Kinge and his wife, that he mighte 
marrie againe and have children, wherunto the Parhament seemeth willinge to 
consent, and the Queene is desirous therof, so that it might growe rather 
from her incapacytie, which shee offereth to confesse, then from incontynencie. 
This is nowe earnestly persecuted and likely to take effect. 

As I was concludinge this letter the 25th of this moneth from Aumal, it 
pleased the Kinge to sende for me, and to acquainte me with this newes, that the 
vangarde of the enemie disloged that night, and that the Duke of Parma resolved 
the nexte mominge to come directely to Aumale and ther to lodge that night, 
wherat he verie much marveilled; and not beleevinge it, he resolved to 
goe verie earely in the mominge to the warre with 500 horse to observe the 
enemies march and to dispute his lodginge at Aumale. Wherfore he lefte 
all his baggage in the towne, and moste of his Frenche horse, and departed 
himselfe with his 500 horse accordingly ; but before he was gone twoo leagues 
in his way towards Poix, the enemie appeared, and all his armie in battell, 
marchinge directlie towards Aumale. Wheruppon the Kinge approched 
neare unto his vantgarde within 50 paces, and gave order for his baggage 
and the reste of the troups to dislodge whilest he did skirmishe with the 
enemie, and retyre, which he performed very discreetly for three or foure 
houres, often charginge the enemie without losse, and himselfe in person un- 
armed was the first that gave the charge, and the laste that retraicted, and 
he onley directed all, havinge no great Capten aboute him. Att the last the 
enemy, came on soe fast, and the Kinge enterteyninge the skirmishe so longe 
in respecte of the dislodginge of his baggage, and the reste of his troupes, that 
we and the enemie entered pesle mesle into Aumale, and the Kinge was moste 



286 [January, 

unhappelie shott in the loweste parte of his raines, which hurte did nothinge 
amaze him, and he not withstandinge with greate resolution comforted the 
rest and made his retraict without losse of any man of marke and only of 
some harquebuzyers : La Verdyn and divers gentlemen on bothe sides are 
shott. 

The shott entred with obliquitie downewards into the fleshe and not directly 
into his body, so that greate hope is conceaved of his short recovery, and the 
surgeon is of opinion that noe vitaU parte is offended. The accident is more 
feared then the wounde, because the Kinge hath a weeke body and is inclyned 
to a feaver natuaraUie ; notwithstandinge God, I hope, will preserve him, and 
in the meane tyme aU men here are astonished, and my selfe more then any. 
This gentleman can reporte all things more at large, who was present, and 
hath behaved himselfe very well; and Sir William Sackville hath gained 
very greate honor in this service, who shewed as greate forwardnes as any. 
I wiU not faile to advertise of the Kings estate of health from tyme to tyme, 
and am persuaded as yett he shall well recover it. So with much griefe 
and in haste I moste humblie take my leave. 

From Neufchastell, (which waie the enemie will passe to Roan directlie 
with diUigence,) this 26th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comande, 

Henry Unton. 
The Kinge hathe slept very well this night, 

and without grudginge of an ague in very 
good temper. This dothe putt us in better 
comforte; onlie we feare his rydinge may 
distemper him. It is thought he will not dis- 
lodge and wee have noe newes as yeat of the 
enemyes motion. 2,000 Spaniards are entred 
into New Haven as it is brated. I crave 
pardon for my scribles, beinge in very greate 
haste. 
This 27th 

I have receavede noe letters from your Lordship sythence the 15th of 
December, but that of the 23d for my Lord of Essex revocation.i 
• This postscript is not found in the Bodleian transcript. 



A. D. 1592.] 287 



CL. 

1592. 

27 Jan. " From Sir Robert Cecyll ; by John Symons. " 

Sir, I knowe nott what to write you that may contente you from hence, 
seeinge your revocation is not determined. It cannot be sudden nor abrupte 
without prejudice, and therfore must your freinds doe as they may. In the 
meane tyme whatsoever you may heare of this body or that of any indisposition 
of the Queenes towards you, I assure you I knowe noe manner of scruple 
shee conceiveth either of wante of dilligence, discreation, or judgment ; and 
therfore howe much soever your purse be galled, your reputation is exceedinglie 
encreased, and wUI, I doubt not, prove your contentment. 

My Lord of Essex is exceedinglie weU setled in her Majesties grace, and I 
hope shall shortely receave some apparent marke therof in the eye of the world. 
All other officers are yett unmade, and for secretaries noe manner of speech. 
The Queene wUI send no forces to your succors, and wee have ben longe nowe 
from hearinge from you. More I cannot say, but that Clifford discoursed with 
me by my bedd side to daie howe iU he Uked France. And thus remajminge 
moste ready to doe you aU treue offices of a perfect freinde, as I have vowed, 
I leave you to God. 

From the Corte at White Hall, this 27th of January, 1591. 

Your lovinge and faithfUl freind, 

Robert Cecyll. 

To my honorable freind. Sir 
Henrie Unton, Knight, her Ma- 
jesties Ambassador in France. 



288 [January, 



CLI. 

1592, 

27 Jan. " To the Earle of Essex ; by Mr. Harte. " 

My honorable good Lord. This unhappye accydent of the Kings hurt 
(beinge shot by a carbyne into the raynes of the backe,) dothe greatly amaze 
us, and that blowe was like to have made an ende of the tragedie here, and 
had ben the begininge of ours ellswhere, which God, I hope, in His mercy will 
prevent. The wounde is deepe, but not dangerous, and rather outward than 
inward ; we apprehend much, and feare more the accydents then the blowe, 
yett hathe he slept very well and is as yett in very good temper and well dis- 
posed. I did never see any beare his hurte with such corage and resolution, 
comfortinge his company and ooncealinge his hurte ; which if he had not donne, 
the daie had ben wourse in respecte of our astonishment. He behaved him- 
selfe moste royallie, beinge the firste in every charge, unarmed ; and in a 
manner, the last, directinge all himselfe. 

Hee went onlie with 500 horse to observe the enemies march in battell, 
which he performed, and retyred with honor and danger. This he did the ra- 
ther to suffer his baggage to pass out of Aumale and the rest of his troupes, 
otherwise they had ben surprised in their lodgings, Laverdine with divers 
others where hurte, but no greate losse of either of them miscarried. Herof 
this gentleman Mr. Harte, can more particularly describe aU to your Lordship, 
for that he was present. 

Sir William SackvyU behaved himselfe very galliantly and resolutely, and 
hath gotten verie greate honor. I assure your Lordship he deserved as weU as 
the beste, and your Lordship maie binde him greatelyto procure him a regiment, 
if any troupes come over, which the Kinge very much desireth. He is well 
wourthy of it, and dothe honor your Lordship greately. 

The Duke of Parma is at Aumale, and (as it is thought) dislodgeth this daie 
to take the waie of Neufchastell, and so directly to Roan, with all dilligence ; 
fearinge succors out of England and the Lowe Countries. He is very farr ad- 
vanced and resolveth to accepte the battell, for the which also the Kinge pre- 
pareth. I feare if it shall fall out, we shalbe beaten for wante of foote. The 



A. D. 1592,] 289 

Kinge prolongeth it as much as he can, expecting the Marshall D'Omont, the 
Duke of Bouillion, and others, which are not yett come to him. He saieth he 
will advertise your Lordship in tyme. I am of opinion it wilbe within this 
fifteene daies at the uttermost. The Kinge expecteth daiely letters from your 
Lordship, and I should be very proude I mighte receave any from you concer- 
ninge your increase of honor. 

Concerninge myselfe I have placed my whole confidence in your Lordship, 
and depend onely upon your favor, accordinge to your Honors promise. I 
finde those whome I suspected before your Lordships departure, to continewe 
badd offices towards mee. I humbly beseech your Lordship to keepe me in her 
Majesties favor, and to revoke me with her favor as of her owne will, not by 
my desire, wherein you shall binde me everlastingly. Some doe as much dis- 
grace my services as they can, and my absence dothe geive them greate ad- 
vantage ; your Lordship only, next to her Majestic, muste protecte me ; which 
I humbly crave, and for the which I will honestly serve you. 

The Kinge dothe continewe his trewe affection to your Lordship, and hath 
written accordingly. He sendeth his messengers expressly, feedinge his hope 
by your Lordships meanes of succors. My freinds doe write that I am con- 
demned to be to much French ; your Lordship can best answer for me ; and 
howe much French soever they accompt me, I hope never to forgett my duty 
and fidelitie to her Majestic and my countrey. Sir Edw. Stafford (as I heare) 
protesteth openlie againste me, reputinge me to doe badd offices here againste 
him, which I proteste I never did. This his misconceipt dothe nourishe his 
mallice ; wherin I am inocent. I will not longer hold your Lordship with this 
my privatt ; wherefore I moste humbhe take my leave, never leavinge truly to 
honor your Lordship above all men. 

From Neufchastell, the 27th of Januarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships ever to comande. 

Hen. Uxton. 



p p 



290 [January, 



CLII. 

1592. 

29 Jan. " To Mr. Vicechamberline ; by Mr. Harte." 

Your Honors letters of the 16th of January, I receaved the 26th, to 
my singular comforte and encouragement, protestinge ever trewly to honor and 
serve you and depend uppon your favor accordinge to your honorable offer, 
and hould myselfe happy when any poore fortune male meritt your good 
opinion ; wishinge my deeds rather then wourds maie speake for me. Your 
honorable advise and liberty geven me to write or forbeare dothe manifestly 
wittnes your honorable affection ; I doe well knowe my advertisements can 
nothinge at all increase your Honors knowledge, because you have better then 
mine, and the beste from all partes ; neither doe I offer myn as wourthy of 
yourselfe, but rather to expresse my love and duty, havinge noe better meanes. 
Your advise proceadeth out of your sound judgment and perfecte experience, 
and it confirmeth that which before I had reason to suspect, which I wiU 
foUow, and take the benefitt of that libertie it pleaseth your Honor to graunte 
me. Yett I will not omitt by any trustie messenger to advertise you of any 
matter of wourthe, and wilbe bound to deliver my opinion some tymes, 
wherin I am contente to discover my weaknes to your Honor, from whom I 
will conceale nothinge, wherby you may the better assure yourselfe of my 
devotion and integritie. 

Of the purpose of the proceedinge of the King and the Duke of Parma, which 
your Honor requireth, this is my poore opinion. First, for the Kinge, that if 
God permitt him, he will geive the other battell when he shall approache neare 
Roan, or beseege this towne, or Deepe ; both which are supported, and not 
without grownde. But the Kinge is not able to make good the seege of Roan 
and to give him battell, wantinge foote to performe well either of them ; and 
moste of his infantrey that he had before Roan are either dead or disbanded. 
If the Kinge abandon the seege of pourpose to geive battell, they of the towne 
will in the meane tyme fill upp our trenches and burn upp our lodgings ; and 
then smale hope of good to renewe the seege, for they within wilbe releived, 
and the Kings armies for want of meanes breake, consistinge of voluntaries and 



A. D. 1592.] 291 

of such as after two monethes will departe ; but the Kinge is resolved not to 
quite the seege untiU the enemie be so ingaged as he must needes fight or 
retoume with dishonore and hazard. 

The Duke of Parma, being advertised of the factions within Roan and of the 
inhabitants willingnes to capitulate by reason of their wantes, which are very 
greate, and of their feare to ruine fortune, he resolveth to caste some compa- 
nies into the towne and other supplies, without a battell ; which he perswadeth 
himselfe he may easily doe, in respecte the towne is not soe closely and 
throughly beseiged as it ought to be. But rather then he will faile therin, he 
hathe both comission and wiU to accepte the battell, wherof he hathe lately 
assured the Governor, Villars, and Monsr. de Mayne ; and by the diUigence 
he useth, and by the course of his journey, it is more probable he will by force 
raise the seege, and not by amusinge himselfe uppon any towne, diverte it ; so 
that this recipoke resolution, bothe in the Kinge and him, dothe geive us in a 
manner assurance of a battell, and that very shortely ; the Kinge delapnge it 
untill his forces out of the Lowe Countreis and of his subjectes be come unto 
him ; the other hasteninge for feare therof and of succors outof England, which I 
perceave he hathe no cause to feare, albeit I could otherwise wishe it, knowinge 
his necessity ; because it is hke to prove not only the blowe of France but of 
Christiendom. 

The unhappie accident of the Kings late hurte, (beinge this dale shott into 
the raines of the backe by a carbyne in his retreate,) dothe amaze us all and 
nourishe strange conceipts and irresolutions ; for without his presence none 
can or will comande, and not obey any other. The obhquitie of the wound, 
slauntinge downwardes into his fleshe, dothe make it more deepe then 
dangerous, yett the accydents are to be feared in respecte of the weaknes of 
his body and inclynation to a fever. He was the first at everie charge, and 
the last at the retraict, which contynued very hotely foure or five hours ; 
wherin many of bothe sides were hurte, but fewe slaine. It pleased him 
alwaies to take me with him to see his directions, and I was close by him 
when he was hurte. 

The enemy entred pesle mesle with us into Aumale, which lodginge we 
disputed as longe as we were able, to th'ende our baggage and the rest of the 
troupes with in the towne might march away, which they did, and we did 
plainely take viewe of all the Duke of Parmas army with 500 horse, which 
hath coste us deare, onely because of the Kings hurte, wherof we feare as yett 



292 [January, 

noe greate danger ; but if it should, I leave it to your better consideration 
what is likely to foUowe not only to Fraunce but to us, the Duke of Parma 
beinge so neare us with his army. Sir William Sackvyll did behave himselfe 
moste galliantly in his service, as he dothe in all others. He wiU prove a 
verie wourthy gentleman, and hathe gained verie greate honor here, which he 
well deserveth. This tyme is more fitt for a souldier then an ambassador, and 
I am forced in that course to foUowe the Kinge to doe her Majestie the better 
service, which I would otherwise forbeare. 

Thus cravinge pardon for my bouldnes, and submittinge my conjectures and 
rawe opinions to your Honors better judgment, wherin I am more willinge to 
obey you then able to satisfye you, with offer of my poore service, I moste 
humbly take my leave, and rest. 

From NeufschasteU, this 27th of Januarye, 1591. 

Your Honors whollie to commande, 

Henry Unton. 



CLHI. 

1592, 

31 Jan. " Againe from the lord Threasurer ; by John Symons. '' 

My lord Ambassador. The letter here iacluded hathe layen by mee three or 
foure dales, expectinge that her Majestie would have written a letter to the 
French Kinge, which hath ben deferred for some lacke and indisposition of 
her health, which nowe (thanckes be to God) is in good perfection ; but yett 
shee nowe forbeareth to write thinckinge the tyme paste, willinge me to send 
my former written letter, by which you shall understande the causes of her Ma- 
jesties refusall to satisfie the French Kinges request for any more men. And 
besides that which is therin written, her Majestie would have you to remember 
to the Kinge and such of his counsell you deale with, mislikinge her Majesties 
refusall, the contynuall charges shee dothe susteyne in spendinge of her 
treasure and wastinge of her people first in Bryttaigne, wher ther are wasted 



A. D. 1592.] 293 

almost 3,000 of her subjects, and in Normandie almoste twice as many, 
besides pyoners and myners, and charges of her shipping ; all which her 
Majestie thincketh, if they were some tymes remembred to the Kinge or his 
counseU, — knowing what charges shee is att bothe in the Lowe Countries, 
in Ireland, and at the sea, — the Kinge would not so often presse her to her 
newe charges. 

Her Majestie thincketh verie longe, and desireth to hearefrom thence of the 
Kings aifaires ther, both of the seege of Roan, and for his forces againste the 
Duke of Parma, and likwise howe the Duke of Parma proceadeth ; wherin 
thoughe I knowe not what is certenly donne ther, yett beinge ignorant of the 
actions, I am of opinion that the Duke will not venture a battell ; but findinge 
himselfe furnished with paie for all his forces, and knowinge the Kinge unable 
to paye his, he will rather linger his warr and disfurnishe the Kinge by 
mutinie of his Almaines or departure for lacke of peace. And therfore, though 
the faulte past cannott be amended, yett if the Kinge had attempted Roan, 
when he went aboute Noyen and those other things, afore the Duke of Parma 
was able to come into the feild, he hadd wonne Roan, and ben able to have 
nowe att this tyme beaten the Duke of Parma out of France ; and suerly this 
reason hath moved her Majestie to condemne the French Kings slownes, 
althoughe I confesse it is noe remedie for the mischeefe past. 

I thincke you heare howe diverse of our gentlemen of vallewe are fallen 
sicke and some of them dead since ther retourne, which doth indeed discorage 
the sendinge of any more men. 

And so havinge att this present no other speciall matter to write unto you, 
and findinge this messenger ready to departe, I make an end. 

Your verie lovinge freind, 

William Birgiiley. 
My Lord of Hertford hath such care of you 
as he thancketh me often for my good will to you, 
wherof you may be assured for manie respects. 

From the Corte, this last day of January, 1591. 



294 [Febkuar-x, 



CLIV, 

1592, 

1 Feb. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Mussy." &gt; 

My verie good Lord. I understande by Monsr. du Plessys that the 
pacquett your Lordship delivered unto him for me is miscarried by the takinge 
of his secretarie prisoner, who had the carriage therof ; wherfore I humblie 
crave a double of it, if the same containe matter of importaunce. Your Lord- 
ships other pacquett of the 16th of the laste moneth, I receaved by Capten 
Hues, the 30th ; other letters I have had none since the 15th of December. 
If your Lordship would please to sende your letters by the postes, I might 
receave them with better dilligence and safetie. 

By your letters of the 16th I perceive the receipte of myne of the 9th and 
10th. Three other dispatches I have made since, and this is the 4th ; so that 
by this tyme my former three pacquetts are I hope come to your Lordships 
hands ; for I am verie desirous to supplie my insufficiency with my dilligence. 

My oversight in suiferinge the Earle of Essex to see her Majesties letters, 
wherwith her Majestic chargeth me, I humblie acknowledge, and crave her 
gratious pardon therin ; the manner wherof I presume male somewhat excuse 
the matter, for the letters were lefte by Painter, the messenger, at Damestalle, 
and sent me by one of the Earle of Essex servants, who came with his 
Lordship to Goumay, and in his Lordships presence delyvered me those 
letters. Wheruppon he required me to open the pacquett, and saied he 
hoped I had letters for him. My simplicitie suspectinge nothinge was the 
only cause of this my error, and uppon the openinge of the letters his Lord- 
ship snatched her Majesties letters to him out of my hands before the readinge 
of any of myn; wherfore I humbly crave her Majesties pardon and your 
Lordships mediation for this my simplicitie. 

The excuse your Lordship hathe made to the French Ambassador con- 

cerninge the Kings unkinde suspition of my lacke of good will to his service 

hath somewhat satisfied him, but not throughly. Some others have lately in 

England encreased his suspition, aUeadginge I have done many badd offices 

' The original of this letter is contained in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 295 

towards him in my advertisements. I perceave it is verie hard to doe her 
Majestic service, and to please him ; and I hope your Lordship will be pleased 
to justific me for my advertisements, wherin I have never nomishcd~iU 
intelligence betweene her Majestic and him. This manner of deaUinge dothe 
much discorrage me, and as much hinder her Majesties service here ; for if her 
Ministers wante credit, they shall wante the beste meanes to doe her service 
as they ought. My hope is your Lordship will justly excuse me herin, 
to whome I only appeale. It is my unhappines to be thus treated at home 
and abroade ; yett will I never faile to performe my duty to her Majestic, 
which is my only care. 

I have dealte earnestly with the Kinge, since the Earle of Essex departure 
and since the receipte of your Lordships letter, concerninge the victualinge of 
her Majesties pynases, as your Lordship requireth, which the Kinge hath often 
comanded, and by his letters this day to his counsel! doth instante the same. 
What is donne therin I knowe not, havinge ben absent allmoste this five 
weekes. I will not faile to soUicitte it and doubte nothinge of the performance 
therof. 

Your Lordship writeth that my advertisements touchinge the Duke of 
Parma are confirmed by your espyall, wherof I am right gladd, that I may the 
better credit myne, and the partie herafter ; and the addition of yours is also 
confirmed by myne to me, as maie appeare by my late letters to your Lord- 
ship ; for the impartinge wherof by your Lordship to me I moste humbly 
thanck your Lordship, which I have communicated to the Kinge, to whome 
I would gladly often doe the like ; for he is inquisitive of me to knowe what 
newes I receave from your Lordship. 

The Kinge hearde not of the strange accidente in Scotland but by your 
Lordships letters ; and was glad to heare the particularity s conteyned in your 
Lordships letters. These your Lordships advertisements are very acceptable 
to the Kinge, and I acknowledge myselfe greatly bounde to your Lordship 
that you vouchsafe me soe greate a favor. 

The liste your Lordship requireth of the Kings forces wilbe very shortley 
perfected, the stale wherof hath ben this longe troublesome journey, without 
rest, and my curiositie to make it perfecte, beinge loathe other waies to present 
it to your Lordship. 

Concerninge matters of Roan I doubt not but your Lordship is suflBciently 
advertised by Sir Roger Williams, who can best reporte them. This only I 



296 [February, 

must remember that the Kinge hath lately given order to make a bridge ther 
over the ryver, that his forces one bothe sides therof may the better arrive to 
ayde one another ; especially if the Duke of Parma aproche neare. And if his 
forces out of the Lowe Countreys doe come in tyme, and some more from her 
Majestie, wherof the Kinge is lately assured by his Ambassador, then, he 
saieth, he wiU continewe his seege, and yett give the Duke of Parma battaile ; 
which in my poore opinion cannott be well performed, yett such is his resolu- 
tion. He demanded of me if I had any letters, mentioninge the cominge of 
more forces out of England ; I answered, noe, wherat he saied he much 
marvailed. 

Monsr. de la Tremouile is come to Darnestall with his forces and with 
40,000 crownes ; and the Marshall Domont is within a dales journey of the 
Kings army. Monsr. de Longeville also is joyned with the regiment of 
Pycardie, and all his forces ; and the governor of Tours and of divers other 
townes are this day arrived at our campe ; soe that we mise of none but 
Monsr. de BouiUion, who is come to Melun, as the Kinge is advertised. 
These forces come in good tyme, and here in Corte we hearken after nothinge 
but the cominge of the forces out of the Lowe Countreys and from England ; 
but we feare the winde is become a leagur ; it hathe ben longe and is nowe 
contrary. 

The Kings greate care is to pay the Reiters, who spare not to speake for it. 
The 40,000 crownes, which Monsr. de la Tremouile bringeth, shalbe assigned 
to them, and the Kinge is promised 60,000 crownes of marchants in Deep and 
Caen, who shalbe shortely repaied with money lately levied uppon certeyne 
taxes at Bordeaux and in Poictou ; uppon ther muster the Kinge saieth they 
shall not faile of payment. And Monsr. du Plessys is appointed to goe to 
satisfie them, and came yesterday from Deepe, where he had ben to provide 
the money. The French Cathohckes doe murmure much againste her 
Majestie for not sendinge forces in this necessity to the Kinge, and Monsr. de 
Nevers is the cheifest. They sale that "post bellum auxilium" shall come to 
them, and that her Majestie ever releiveth the Kinge when he is uppon the 
brincke and ready to perishe, but the Kinge himselfe reprehendeth them and 
useth verie gratious wourds of her Majestie. I assure your Lordship the 
opinion of her Majesties amitie dothe greatly profytt the King and daunte his 
ennemyes, and he is verie thanckfuU for any good he receaveth from her 
Majestie. 



A. D. 1592.] 297 

The Kings cure goeth well on, and beginneth to matter. It is very paine- 
full, but nothinge dangerous. He hath had no accesse of feaver or ill accident. 
He is carried in a brancard like unto a litter, and is not able to ride on horse- 
backe, nor yett well to walke, which dothe hinder his service, for without him 
nothinge is attempted. Her Majestie may make many praie for her if shee 
please to admonishe the Kinge of his to much indangeringe of himselfe. 

The Spaniards that lately landed at Newhaven are as yett refused to enter 
the towne, and the nomber doth not exceed 500 or 600 ; more are dailie 
expected ther. Monsr. de Maine dothe underhand hinder their receipt into 
New Haven, who is very weary of the Spanishe forces, and dothe not well 
accorde with the Duke of Parma. 

The losse of the Duchesse of Mercury, as your Lordship knoweth, is much 
in question amonste the Kings counsell, whether it will profitt the Kinge or 
hinder his services. She was knowen to be a superstitious Leaguer, and 
governed her husband, but noe more Spanishe then to profitt herselfe, and 
with hope therby to preserve her right and title to Brittaine, which is nowe 
dead and extinct with her, havinge noe issue lefte ; so that the Duke Mercury 
cannot pretend for himselfe as before. Whether therfor he will prove more 
Spanishe or lesse, is doubtfiill. The Spanish agent in Brittanye did complaine 
in his letters to the Kinge, before the Duchesse death, of her wante of devotion 
and coldnes to his masters service. I leave the due consideration therof to 
your Lordship, and t3rme will shortely discover the truth. 

The matters in Aragon are advertised to be accorded betweene the Kinge 
of Spayne and his subjectes, yett it is not here beleived. They of Aragon that 
revolted did longe since sende their deputies to the Kinge of France sister, to 
procure of him aide, as I did advertise your Lordship, firom Briteul ; and they 
are not yett retoumed. 

On Saturday laste the Kinge, havinge advise that the Duke of Parma 
marched the day before towards Eu, from Aumale, he departed from Neuf- 
chastell to St. Aubyn, a village within halfe a league of Arques, in the waie to 
Deepe, and lodged his army alonge the ryver betweene NeufchasteU and 
Arques, which waie the ennemie muste needes passe from Eu to Roan ; but 
the Duke of Parma wente directly to Blanchy, and ther lodged himselfe, and 
aboute him his armye, in three villages next adjoyning. Wheruppon the 
Kinge retoumed towards Roan, but the Duke of Parma came not yesterday. 
The Kinge came to this village of AuflFy of purpose to drawe his forces together, 

Q Q 



298 [February, 

and so to geve battaile if the enemie advanced neare Roan; which they 
hasten with all dilligence, to succor the towne, marchinge yesterday to 
Mortomer, a village with in two or three leagues of Neufchastell ; and from 
thenc the Kinge is advertised the enemy goeth directly towards Roan, betweene 
Neufchastell and Goumay, intendinge to take Neufchastell in his waie, if he 
can. The Kinge wisheth that the Duke of Parma would amuse himselfe uppon 
Neufchastell, that his forces out of the Lowe Countreys and out of England 
might arrive before the battell ; for his only wante is of infanterie. He 
requireth me earnestly that such forces as her Majestic intendeth to sende, 
maie use all possible speed, and in the meane season he will march neare 
Roan to prepare his forces for the battell ; and even no\ye he hathe receaved 
advertisement from Monsr. de Bouillion by his secretary that he is arryved 
with his forces with in 3 or 4 leagues of Roan ; wherof he is very gladd. So 
in haste, I moste humblie take my leave. 
From AuiFy, this firste of Februarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships ever to comand, 

Henry Unton, 



CLV. 

1592, 

1 Feb. " To Mr. Vice Chamberline ; by John Mussy. " i 

This your Honors servant I stayed, of purpose to give him a packett, and 
the rather to assure your Honor of the Duke of Parmas intent, and of the 
Kings resolution. Since my laste from Neufchastell the Kinge marched to St 
Aubyn, a village within a mile of Arques ; being advertised that the Duke of 
Parma marched towards Eu,2 which he did ; and uppon the change of his 
resolution to take the way betweene Neufchastell and Goumay directly to Roan, 
to levye the seege before the cominge of the Kings forces. The King hathe 

1 A copy of this letter is found in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 328. 
' Here the Cottonian MS. begins. 



A. D. 1592.] 299 

accordingly altered his march. So the one marched from Blanchy to 
Mortomer, a village within three leagues of NeufchasteU, and this day dislodg- 
eth. The other came to this towne to drawe nearrer to his forces at Roan, 
where, within 4 or 5 leagues, if the Duke of Parma advance neare Roan, 
he resolveth to present the battell. The Kings only desire is to temporize 
untill his forces out of the Lowe Cuntreys be come to him. The Duke of Parma, 
to prevent that, hasteneth the more. If he beseege not NeufchasteU by the 
waie, (which the Kinge wisheth, to entertaine tyme, and it is soe beleived he 
will doe,) then maie the Englishe and Flemishe forces arrive in good tyme, 
otherwise to late ; for the battell muste needs be then given within these sixe 
dales, and our seege perforce levyed. 

Monsr. de Boullon is within three leagues of Roan with his forces, and the 
Marshall D'Omont will joine with our army to-morrowe. The Duke 
Longeville with the regement of Pycardie is anyved and all his other forces, 
and La Tremouile and divers others with their troupes ; so that we shall 
wante fewe French or none. The enemies course directeth ours, and bothe pre- 
pare for the battell. The goodnes of our cause will, I hope, prevaile. In the 
meane season we feare the winde to be come a Leaguer, it is so con- 
trary. 

Monsr. de la Tremouile hath brought 4,000 crownes for the paiement of the 
Reyters, and the Kinge maketh provision for their payment. If they be not paied 
before the battell, I feare they will excuse their wante of corage with wante of 
paie, and so refuse to fight. This is to be feared, because they are not very 
forwarde, and do urge so earnestly their paie. So leavinge further to trouble 
your Honor, beinge forced to end in hast, I moste humbhe take my leave, 
protesting unfeynedly to rest at your Honors disposinge and comand, 

Henry Uxtox. 
From Auflfy, the first of Februarie, 1591. 



300 [February. 



CLVI. 

1592, 

1 Feb. " To the Earle of Essex ; by John Mussy. " i 



My verie good Lord ; on Satturday laste we marched to St. Aubine within a 
mile of Arques, and yesterday came to this towne ; the enemy marched to Au- 
male and Blanchy, and from then to Mortemer, by Neufchastell.*^ The 
enemies course directeth the Kinge ; for they hasten to Roan, and take the 
waye betweene Neufchastell and Gournay. Some imagine they will beseege 
Neuchastell, which the Kinge rather wisheth, to enterteyne tyme untill the 
forces out of England and the Lowe Countreis be come unto him ; and those 
of England he requesteth your Lordship to hasten with all possible speed, as 
you have ben the only procurer therof ; for the which the Kinge protesteth all 
thanckfuUnes to your Lordship, and that newes hathe much revyved him. 

All the French forces are joyned with the Kinge, and by tomorrow night he 
will neither wante Monsr. Bouillon, who is within three leagues of Roan, nor 
the Marshall D' Omont, who by that tyme wUbe at Dametall. Monsr. de la 
TremouiUe is come, and many others, wherof the Kinge is right gladd ; and he 
draweth neare Roan to present the batteU, if the Duke of Parma [doe advance 

within 4 or 5 leages. B ]* will firste take Neufchastell or Gournay; 

ells (your Lordship knoweth) he male within sixe dales march come to Roan, 
soe that we shortely expecte an ende of this great action. 

Your Lordships letter I receaved, for the which 1 doe acknowledge myselfe 
moste bounde, and for the contynuance of your Honors favor, wheruppon I 
whollie and only rehe. I am exceedinglie chidden by her Majestie, in a letter 
of my Lord Threasurers, for permittinge your Lordship to have your letters ; 
and he wrighteth that notwithstandinge your Lordships excuse of snatchinge of 
it out of my hands, her Majestie is not, nor wiU not be, satisfied. My humble 

' The draft of this letter Is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 326. 
^ Here begins the copy in the Cottonian MS. 

^ This passage, omitted in the Bodleian transcript, is supplied from the Cottonian copy, in which, 
however, it is slightly imperfect. 



A. D. 1592.] 301 

sute to your Lordship is that her Majestic may be better satisfyed ; for 
I am mightelie threattened unlesse you stande my good Lord. 

We have noe other newes of importaunce, but the expectation of a battel], 
and the flockinge of the French aboute the Kinge, and that the Kinge begineth 
to recover of his hurte, which will not suffer him to ryde but in a brancorde, 
neither to walke upp and downe ; which is a deathe unto him, I assure your 
Lordship the wounde is verie painefiill to him, and he hathe ben often ill dis- 
posed since his hurte, but no danger nor feare of ague if he keepe good order, 
which he dothe not. 

This day the Duke of Parma marcheth from Mortomer. By my next your 
Lordship shalbe certeinly advertised. I feare we shall shortely rayse the seege 
if the Duke of Parma use the diligence he pretendeth. 

So in all haste, (beinge commanded by the Kinge to thancke your Lordship 
highUe in his behalfe, and to requeste you to love him,) I moste humbUe take 
my leave, protestinge I rest wholly 

Your Lordships most bounde to commande, 

Henry Unton. 
From Aufiy ' this firste of February, 1591. 



CLvn. 

1592, 

1 Feb. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by John Mussy." ^ 

Your Honors letters of the 9th of the last moneth I receaved by Peter 
Browne, the messenger, wherby I perceive the effecte of the Earle of Essex 
retoume, the suply of the States, the offence of her Majestic conceived ^ for 
my permittinge the Earle of Essex to have her Highnes letters, the sendinge of 
Grimston, and your particular apprehension of things concerninge me, and 

1 " Offy " in the original draft. 

' The original draft of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E, viii. fol. 334. 

3 Here the Cottonian draft of the letter begins. 



302 [Febbuaky, 

your honorable care of me ; for the which I acknowledge myselfe moste 
bounde ; and am very proude when I receave any letters of your Honors, to 
whome I never faile to write with every occasion to wittnes my duty. 

The good efFecte of my Lord of Essex retourne and of the States supplie is 
very acceptable to the Kinge, but it is feared that they will come to late, and 
so post bellum auxilium. The battell is shortely exspected, and if the Duke of 
Parma doe not beseege some towne, but hasten to succor Roan, as he dothe, 
it may be given within these six or eight dales. We only seeke to temporize, 
and he to prevente the jojminge of the Kings forces and the cominge of ours ; 
but the French are all arrived, so that we hope of victorie but dispaire of the 
seege, if greater supplies come not in tyme. But herin, and in other matters, 
I remitt your Honor to my Lord your fathers letters, to whom I have written 
at large. 

The offence of her Majestie I cannott deny but I have deserved, but not 
willingly ; wherin I humbly beseech your Honor to satisfie her et consdenticB 
vox is confessio, and pardon proceadeth of grace onley, which I humbly crave ; 
and it shalbe a warninge ; but I could not otherwise have prevented it. 

It pleased my lord Threasurer to comend Grimston to me, who had (as I 
was informed out of England,) donne me many wronges, wherwith I charged 
him at his cominge ; but I hope now he will not complaine of my usage, and 
my Lord your Father may comande me at his pleasure, whom I will trewly 
honor and serve. I must acknowledge his Lordships great goodnes and your 
Honors mediation for allowance of my bylls of transportation, and otherwise. 
I dare not write of my thanckfiiUnes to his Lordship in my letters to him 
because his Lordship sometymes shewes my letters to her Majestie. I humbly 
crave of your Honor to signifie so much to his Lordship in my behalfe, which 
I doe not forgett duely also to your Honor. 

The Kinge is here advertised that I have donne ill offices for him to her 
Majestie, which doth not render me so acceptable as I have ben. They offer 
me heard measure who are the authors. I am also advertised they doe as ill 
offices to her Majestie of me. My freindes have promised I shall shortely 
knowe, and I presume the rather by your Honors meanes, for, I cast my whole 
care uppon you and my Lord your father; and my inocencie and your favors 
shall I trust ever protect me, which is my only comforte. They seeke to 
weary me and discourage me to serve her Majestie, but so she be pleased, I 



A. D. 1592.] 303 

respecte ther mallice nothinge. It shall make me rather wary than weary. 
And so I moste humblie take my leave. 
From Aufiy ' the firste of February, 1591. 

Your Honors to command, 

Henry Unton. 



CLVIII. 
1592, 
3 Feb. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Peter Browne." « 

My very good Lord. Accordinge to my laste advertisement of the Duke of 
Parmas intente to take Neufchastell, he did investe the same the daie of my last 
dispatch ; and without trench or gabion, or other ceremonies, he battered the 
towne ^ on that side of the abbey, 200 paces of, and continued his batterie the 
next daie, havinge made a breache of a 200 foote. Whereuppon Monsr. 
Gieury, the collonells Temple and Rebowrse, findinge it no longer tenable, 
(who had caste themselves with 300 horse and their regements of foote into 
the towne,) were contented to yeald the towne uppon a moste honorable com- 
position offered them by the Duke of Parma, which was made yesterday, and 
they then departed. 

The composition was that the captens, commanders and souldiers, should 
departe with ensigne displayed, the drome sowndinge, with their match hght 
and their bulletts in the mouth, with their horse, bagges and baggage ; and 
such of the burgesses as would not stale, had leave also to departe. The 
reste to stale without pillage or spoile of their goods ; and the castle not men- 
tioned in the capitulation, so that holdeth out as yett, but cannott continew 
longer then five or six dales. The Governor is within it with his garrison, and 
muste be forced to quite with an honorable composition. 

This composition dothe greately satisfye the Kinge, in respecte of the horses 

' " Offy," Cottonian MS. 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft, corrected by Sir Henry himself, is pre- 
served in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 339. 
'Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



304 [February. 

and men of accompt M'hich were so ingaged within it ; and he is the better 
pleased that the castle houldeth out, hopinge by that meanes there to amuze 
the enemie untUl the forces out of England and the Lowe Countreys doe ar- 
ryve ; uppon whose arryvall he resolveth to give battell imediatly, and yett to 
blocke Roan if he can. He presseth me continually to remember her Majestic 
of our Englishe, and that they may make all possible dilligence, without the 
which it is feared he will have a blowe. 

Our myners at Roan doe more wourke in twoe houres then the French in two 
daies, and did not understand their worke before the Englishe came. Thus 
much the Kinge confessed to me, and hopeth of some good effecte. Diverse 
perswaded the Kinge to raise his seege at Roan, to succor Neufchastell, and to 
geive the Duke of Parma batteU there ; wherunto he would not barken, beinge 
resolved to contynue the seege untill he be forced to levy it. So in post hast I 
moste humblie take my leave. 

From Buchy, the 3rd of (February yearley in the morninge,) 1591. 

Your Lordships to comande, 

Henry Unton. 



CLIX. 

1592, 

5 Feb. "From the Lord Threasurer; receaved the I6th, 

by Monsr. Desanges of Brest. " 

My Lord Ambassador. Althoughe I have not much leisure at this tyme to 
write unto you, yett findinge the bearrer herof ready to repaire thither to the 
Kinge, who came from the Governor of Brest very lately to declare the state of 
that porte, I thought good only to lett you knowe that at one tyme yesterday 
in the morninge (beinge the 4th of this moneth,) I receaved two letters, one 
brought by a gentleman caUed Mr. Harte, dated the 27th of the laste, the other of 
the first of this moneth, by Muchy, which beinge first deUvered to me, I founde 
therin a sentence declaringe the amendement of the Kings cure for his wounde. 



A. D. 1592.] 305 

havinge not hard before of his hurte ; but afterwards readinge your other letter 
of the older date, I perceived the manner of the Kings hurte, which with the 
circumstances therof astonished us here for the hazard and the perill, but after- 
wards gladd of the escape. 

Amonst other things, partely by your owne reporte, and more particular- 
ly by Mr Harte and letters of Sir William SackvyU, her Majestie findeth your 
adventure greater then in respecte of your office she liketh, although therin 
you have shewed the parte of a vaUiant gentleman, and though herof I have 
hertofore written unto you, yett nowe her Majestie hathe comanded mee second- 
lie to charge you eamestlie, in respecte you are her Ambassador, not to hazard 
yourselfe in suchlike sorte anie more, for so might the case happen if you 
should be taken prisoner, ether it would be jovi owne undoLnge, or force her 
Majestie to greater charge then shee could like of. And because it may be, 
that your forbearinge, beinge provoked by the Kinge, might move a disHke, I 
meane to deale with the Ambassidor here to advertise the Kinge in what sorte 
her Majestie misliketh these your adventures ; specially in respecte of your 
pubUcke office, and yett that shee liketh you shoulde doe any service otherwise 
to the Kinge that is in your power. 

I perceive that the pacquett of letters which I sent by Monsr. de Plessis, is mis- 
carried, wherin was conte3rned the substance of her Majesties answers to Monsr. 
de Plessis, with the reasons and causes therof; which although it be not very 
needfuU nowe, yett I mynde to send them to you by the next messenger. And 
so I end, wishinge to heare some good successe from thence, wheruppon de- 
pendeth all our futxire estate. 

From Westminster, the 5th of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships assured lovinge freinde, 

William Bdrghley. 



R R 



306 [February, 



CLX. 



1592, 

8 Feb, " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Fancheur. " i 

My verie good Lord. The Castle of Neufchastell was yealded by composi- 
tion to the enemie uppon Satterday laste, without sufferinge breach or batterie, 
which mighte well have endured 800 shott of the cannon, and at length have 
receaved a very honorable composition. The towne and castle is of greate im- 
portaunce to the enemye, in respecte of his retraict and the safe passage of his 
victualls ; and dothe as much annoy the Eange as benefitt the enemie ; yett were 
they not tenable, and coulde not be succored without leavinge our seege. The 
Kinges desire was that they of Neufchastell might have temporised somewhat 
longer, untill the forces out of the Lowe Countreys and from England might 
arryve, which he greately expecteth. 

That day the castle was rendered, the Kinge marched with 1500 French horse 
towards the enemies campe, intendinge to enterprize uppon a quarter of theirs 
at Ecclavelle, were certeine French and Spaniards were lodged; but they, 
havinge intelligenc therof, departed an ower before his cominge ; onlie 10 or 12 
were taken prisoners, and 20tie slaine. Some of the Kings troupes gave as 
farr into the campe as the suburbes of Neufchastell, wherwith the enemie did 
take a very great allarum. We attempte upon one anothers quarter everie 
night, and both our campes are well harried with contynuall aUarums. 

Yesterday, beinge the 7th, the Kinge marched with 2,000 French horse, 
2,000 Reyters, 500 harquebuses on horseback, and as many shott on foote, 
towards the enemies campe. Our place of rendez vous was Bellencombre, foure 
leagues from the Kings quarter, whither he was carried in his litter, and then he 
mounted on horse backe ; from thence he wente to Bures, 2 leagues of, where 
the Duke of Guise was lodged with all the light horse and certeine regements 
of foote. At our rendez vous the Kinge was advertised that the Duke of Parma 
marched, notwithstandinge he kepte on his waye to Bures; and passinge 
throughe the forreste of Cinqsens, where certeyne of our courriers that went to 
discover fell uppon a troupe of fifbie horse of the enemie, which they charged; 
advertisinge the Kinge of the allarum and cravinge more ayde. Wheruppon he 
' The original of this letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 307 

sent the Barron of Byron and Monsr. de Bouillon with 100 horse to second 
them ; so the enemie with the troupe of 50 horse was defeated, and the Count 
Challigny, who commanded them, was taken prisoner by Chicott and very sore 
hurte. This Counte is the Duke of Mercurys brother. Many of his company 
were slaine, and some of them taken prisoners. The Barron of Byron and the 
Duke of Boullon pursued the reste ; wherof some escapinge, they gave the 
allarum to the Duke of Guise his quarter, who by that meanes did barricado 
their lodginge, arme themselves, and some of them moimte on horsebacke. 
Moste of their horse and foote saUied out uppon ours. The skirmishe conti- 
nued almoste an houre, in which tyme manie of our shott came into the Barron 
of Byron, and then they forced the horse and foote to retj^e into the village of 
Bures, where enteringe pesle mesh with them, manie of theirs were slaine, to 
the nomber of 200 in the village and diverse taken prisoners. The reste were 
forced to retyre on the other syde of the ryver ; who were pursued as fair as the 
place would give ours leave. All the Duke of Guises baggadge was taken, and 
of his troupes, and his plate and money, and whatsoever he had ther. His 
Comett was also taken, and almoste 200 horse ledd awaye of horses of service 
and of baggage. The village we sett on fyre, and soe we retyred. 

The Duke of Parma and of Maine were on horsebacke at Bures, followinge 
of the Counte Challigny, who retyred in all hast with certeyne troupes of 
horse. They intended to discover the coimtrey and to take viewe of the pas- 
sages, to the end they might march towards Roan with their army, or sende 
troupes before. If some of the Counte ChaUignys troupe had not gone before, 
and geven them the allarum, they had hardely escaped. 

Monsr. de Nevers was appointed by the Kinge to march at his lefte hande to- 
wards St. Martine le Blanc, with 600 horse, that the enemie might not steale 
behinde us. The Counte Soissons followed the Barron of Byron. Alter him 
the Duke of LongeviUe, then the Kings regement ; and without the woode, the 
Prince of Anhalte with his Reyters. Monsr. de Buhy, who went with Monsr. 
de Nevors, wente before him and charged some of the horse of Monsr. de 
Chiseux, Marshall of the enemies campe, and defeated them, takinge many of 
them prisoners. 

Diverse of the enemie are very sore hurte and manie of ours, but none of 
accompt, onlye Monsr. PraUen is shott, but Sir WiUiam Sackvyll is either ta- 
ken prisoner or slaine ; whether, as yett is not knowen. His losse is verie much 
lamented by the Kinge and the French. He was a verie gallant gentleman and 



308 [February, 

served very bravely. I have sent a Trompett of the Kings to the enemies campe 
to knowe what is become of him ; we hope he is taken prisoner. I am very un- 
willinge to advertise my lord of Buckhurst of this ill newes, and therfore hum- 
bly beseech your Lordship to give him knowledge therof in such sorte, and by 
such meanes as your Lordship shall thincke good. Also I would be gladd to 
knowe what his Lordship will have donne with Sir WiUiam Sackvylls servants, 
horses, and stuffe ; wherof I have taken an inventory, and used therin my best 
care to preserve things from spoile. 

This enterprise of the Kings was attempted in the daie tyme att one of the 
clocke, and the Kinge was in person with the firste and retyred with the laste. 
Hee is to forwarde, and a very greate capten. I protest to your Lordship I 
should not believe by report what I see by him, and wee all wishe he were lesse 
valliant. It pleaseth him to call me Avith him, wherby I see his direction, and 
some tyme remember him of his safty. His to much forwardnes dothe dis- 
corage greately his servants. Capten Swann and Capten Mostian did serve very 
gallantly, and Capten Swann his horse was shott. They are men of good corage. 
My horse dyed as soone as I was retyred to the troups, for we chased the 
enemie three myles uppon the spurr. I assure your Lordship all my horses are 
dead and harried out, and in a manner famished, for wante of meate ; we never 
rest, but are one horsebacke almoste night and daie. I thincke never any Ambas- 
sador lived in France with such charge, toyle, and danger, as I doe ; yett is it 
the saffest place to be with the Kinge in the campe. Notwithstandinge to doe 
her Majestic service, I thincke nothinge to much, and will serve her as longe 
as I am able. My servants die daylie, and many of them are verie weake and 
sicke, who cannot live longe. I muste be forced to have a newe supply bothe 
of men and horses. 

The Duke of Parma contynueth aboute Neufchastell and intendeth, as the 
Kinge is advertised, to dislodge to morrowe and to lodge at Bellencombre, and 
so to hasten with his army towards Roan. He hath contynued ever since my 
laste dispatch aboute Neufchastell, and advanced some of his troupes almoste 
as farr as Arques. He had once resolved to beseege Deepe and take the Polett 
ther, which he might easilie performe if the Kinge should not raise his seege 
and succor the towne. The way to Roan is very badd for his wagons, and 
manie places fitt to give him battell. He relieth only on the strength of his 
waggons, and the Kinge will use his best meanes either to fight trith him in a 
place unfitt for his wagons, or ells to batter them with his cannons. He is 



A. D. 1592.] 309 

loathe to raise his seege untill the Duke of Parma, enforce him and be ingaged 
to fight ; and if he have a suply out of the Lowe Countreys and from her 
Majestic in tyme, he hopeth to make good his seege untill the Duke of Parma 
doe force him to raise it, and fight with him to. Yett I feare it will hardly be 
performed, to fight and continewe his seege. 

The Spanishe and French in the Duke of Parmas campe doe so ill agree as 
they kill each other uppon every advantage. And in Monsr. Trembhcourtes 
quarter, they lodginge together, the French did sett uppon the Spaniards and 
killed 30 in the place. His lieutennant by his consente in his absence did per- 
fourme this outrage, wheruppon he is fledd ; and the Duke of Parma and the 
Spaniards are verie much discontented, and sale they will either by justice or 
force revenge it. 

To morrowe the Kinge intendeth to dislodge from thence to goe to Cleare ; 
and as the Duke of Parma cometh on, he retyreth neare his forces to Roan, so 
that nowe we expecte shortely a battell. The enemies course directeth ours, and 
we change our resolution with his. God directe us for the beste. Out of 
Poictou the Kinge is advertised Monsr. la Gerche is slaine, all his troupes de- 
feated, manie taken prisoners, and verie many slaine, amongst whom were 100 
Spaniards of the garrison of Poictiers. It is a very greate overthrowe, and the 
comanders of the troupes (especially Monsr. la Gerche) were of the worste 
of the Kings enemies in those partes ; soe the contrey wilbe much more 
quiett. 

Monsr. St. Luc hathe accorded with Monsr. Espemon to exchange Bro- 
nage for Bullen, for the which he shall have 200,000 fiancks besides, and a 
shipp wourth 20,000 crownes. This accorde the Kinge utterly misliketh and 
saieth he will remedie, which it is thought he cannott, because they are all 
ready agreed . They are bothe ill afiected to the Kings service, and bothe 
feared to be Spanishe. The one, Monsr. Espemon, is not without cause 
doubted, havinge intelligence with the Spaniards, and persecutinge them of 
the rehgion ; and by this meanes nowe he may the better briddeU them and 
pleasure the Spaniards with that poste which male prove hurtefull to her Ma- 
jestic. The other, Monsr. St. Luc, is feared to be a Spaniard, in respecte of 
his livinge in the Lowe Countreis under the Kinge of Spaine ; for the comodi- 
tie wherof he dothe the rather make exchange for Bullen, which male also 
prove very inconvenient for the Kinge and her Majestic. Hereof I thought it 
necessary to advertise your Lordship at large ; and they of the religion here doe 
much presse the Kinge to hinder this exchange. 



310 [February, 

The Kinge hade lately bestowed uppon Monsr. Clermont one of his gover- 
ments in Bryttany, which the Cathohckes will not permitt, because he is of his 
religion ; and the Kinge hathe also made him one of his Marshalls of his Campe, 
in Guytry his place, wherat the Catholicises did also oppose themselves. 
This manner of proceedinge dothe-much discontent the Kinge and them of 
the religion. 

Some persuade the Kinge that the enemie will fortifie greately St Val- 
lorie, and that Croteau and it are delyvered unto the Duke of Parma, 
wherin he hath abeady placed 5 companies of WaUons. This is not 
credible. 

The parliament of Brittany have sent a deputy to the Kinge to complaine of 
the insufficiency of the Prince D'Ombes and of his counsell, and cravinge a 
better choise of counsell, and some other reformation ; wherwith Monsr. 
Preuneau is much offended. 

The Kinge hath geven order for the victuallinge of her Majesties pynnases, 
and they have had bothe victuall and money, and are promised they shall 
not wante either of one or the other. The myners are greately commen- 
ded for their wourke at the forte, wherof we expect dayly some good 
effecte. The pressinge so much of the forte dothe hasten the Duke of Parma 
so to advance. 

I have sent your Lordship a particular mappe of the countrey, and of all the 
villages within the ryvers of Sene, Some and Oyse ; wherby your Lordship 
may the better perceive our manner of incampinge, and the enemie, and our 
enterprises. 

And this bearrer, my Secretary, I am forced to send with this pacquett for 
wante of a messenger, which is chargeable to me, and dangerous for them I 
send. I feare nowe the miscarringe of my pacquetts, and therfore intende to 
write any greate matter of consequence in cipher, because the enemie dothe in 
a manner possesse the passage of Deepe. Your Lordship may perceive my 
dilligence in writinge ; I knowe not what haste they make with my letters. It 
shalbe their faulte and not myne. And soe I moste humbly take my 
leave, in haste. 

From Buchy, this 8th of Februari, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comande, 

Henry Unton. 



A. D. 1592.] 311 

The Kinge is almoste recovered of his 
hurts, but his rydinge dothe drawe his 
cure to the more length and maketh it 
to be the more painefull ; within tenn 
daies he wUbe througly cured. 



CLXI. 

1592, 

8 Feb. " To the Earle of Essex ; by Fancheur. " i 

My verie good Lord, yesterdaie the Kinge enterprised uppon the Duke of 
Parma his quarter at Bures. He marched with 2,000 French horse and 2,000 
Reyters ; and havinge made his rende vowe at Bellencombre for all his troupes, 
he did take the way of the foreste Cinq sens, where he was advertised ^ of the 
Duke of Parmas marchinge towards him ; and our curriers before did discover 
fiftie horse of the troupe of Counte ChaUigny. Wheruppon the Kinge sent 
the Barron of Byron and Monsr. de Boullon with certeine horse, who 
chargeinge them in route, killed some and did take many prisoners. The 
Counte ChaUigny himselfe was taken by Chicott, the Kings foole ; an unhappy 
accident and fooles fortune, but he was sore hiirte for his labor. We had the 
reste of them in chase untill we came neare Bures, and pursued them uppon 
the spurr, but some of them escaped and gave the allarum unto the quarter, 
wheruppon bothe horse and foote did putt themselves in armes and had tyme 
to barricade themselves in the village. So they saUied with horse and foote, 
havinge as well shott and pikkes. Assone as our shott came into us, we skir- 
mished with them, and at length forced them to retyre into their quarter where 
we entred with them jaesfe mesle, killinge many and takinge some prisoners. We 
had the spoile of their baggage and tooke almoste 200 horse of all sortes in their 
stables ; and the Duke of Guise loste bothe his comet, moneie, and plate, and 
whatsoever he hadd. The reste of the horse retyred on the further syde of the 
ryver, whome we followed as far as the place would suffer us, charginge them 

' The draft of this letter is perceived in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E viii. fol. 345. 
' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



312 [FebbuabYj 

and retyreinge ourselves with honor ; and the enemie never followed untiU we 
were all departed. 

In the village were kiUed 200, and diverse taken prisoners ; but of what 
accompte they were that were slaine or take^ as yett is not certenly knowen. 
One of the enemies Trumpetts is come and demandeth 22 of accompte. I as- 
sure your Lordship it was a verie brave serviccj where the Kinge behaved him- 
selfe moste vaUiantUe, and wished you often with him. 

Sir William Sackvyll, I, Capten Swanne and Captaine Mostion, we marched 
together in the first troupes that charged and entered into the village with the 
enemie, where we kepte longe together. Att the last Sir William was seperated 
from us, we covdd not tell howe, and is either kiUed or taken prisoner. He was 
a verie gallant gentleman and behaved himselfe moste vaUiantly. I doe greately 
greive for him, and his losse is muche lamented by the ICinge. The two 
Captens served moste bravely, and Capten Swann his horse was shott, and 
myne died as soone as ever I was retyred to our troupes. I thincke his harte 
was broken with persuinge the enemie ; but of me or of my service, I beseech 
your Lordship to lett her Majestic knowe nothinge ; for I am assured shee wil- 
be offended with me. Your Lordship I knowe hathe the perticularities of aU 
from the Kinge and Capten Mostian, wherfore I wiU not inlarge the same ; only 
this I muste remember, that Monsr. de Nevers, havinge charge of 600 horse, 
caused some of his to charge a troupe of horse of Monsr. de Chiseaux, one of 
the Marshalls of the enemys campe, which they defeated and tooke many of 
them prisoners. They intended to have caste some troupes into Roan. The 
Dukes of Parmas and Maine were at Bures, intendynge to foUowe the Counte 
Challigny with some horse, intendinge to discover the countreis and their pas- 
sage for the army to Roan ; who fledd and retyred very faste, or eUs they had 
hardely escaped. All his armie were in armes and gave us the lookinge on the 
other side of the ryver, never attemptinge anythinge againste us. 

To morrowe we dislodge to Cleere, because the enemie intendeth to come to 
lodge at Bellencombre, so that we retyre towardes oiu: forces at Roan 
intendinge to geive batteU as neare Roan as may be, and not before the Kinge 
be forced to raise his seege. We cannot well conclude howe the Duke of 
Parma can march with his charretts to Roan by reason of the foule weather and 
highe hills, as your Lordship knoweth; but our pressinge of the forte 
dothe hasten him thither, yett the Kinge delaieth to fight so longe as he cann. 



A. D. 1592.] 313 

expectinge her Majesties forces and those of the Lowe Countreis ; wherin he 
dothe earnestly requeste your Lordship to hasten her Majestie. &gt; 

I will not longer hould your Lordship with my discourse, beinge forced to 
hasten awaie the messenger. And soe I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Buchy, the 8th of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships moste assured to comande, 

Henery Un'Tox. 



CLXIl. 

1592, 

8 Feb. " To Mr. Vice Chamberline ; by Faucheur. " ^ 

Since my last to your Honor the Kinge hath doen a very greate service up- 
pon the Duke of Parmas campe. He went yesterday with 2,000 French 
horse and^ 2,600 Reyters, also with 1,000 shott ; and in the daie tyme, at one 
of the clocke, he gave into the Duke of Guises quarter ; wher the makinge hedd 

againste us [and barricadoinge with horse, shott and pikes against 

us,] ■* which after a longe skirmishe we defeated, kiUinge 200 of them, 
takinge the Duke of Guises Cornett, and manie prisoners ; amonst whom the 
Count ChaUgni, the Duke Mercuries brother, was taken prisoner by the foole 
Chicott ; and had the spoile of the quarter ; and the Duke of Guise loste his 
money, plate, Jewells, and whatsoever baggage he hadd. We entered 
pesle mesle with the enemie into their quarter, and persued them beyonde the 
river ; wher the Duke of Parma himselfe, with most of his horse and foote, 
gave us the lookinge on retiringe, and never enterprisinge anything upon us. 
Our men did take 200 men of all sortes. 

' In the Cottonian draft are here introduced three paragraphs which do not occur in the Bodleian 
transcript, and which therefore were probably not inserted in the fair copy. 

' The draft of this letter may be seen in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii , fol. 343. 

' Here the Cottonian copy begins. 

* These words are inserted from the draft. 

S S 



314 [FEBRUARY} 

Monsr. de Nevers, accompanied with 600 horse, sent before some of his 
troupes with Monsr, de Buhy, who meetinge with the troupe of Monsr. des 
Chiseaux, one of the Marshalls of the enemies campe, defeated them, takinge 
moste of them prisoners. 

The Duke of Parma and the Duke de Maine came to the village of Bures, 
which was the Duke of Guises quarter, and somewhat on this side, accompa- 
nied with some troupes of horse, goinge to discover the countrey for his pas- 
sage of his army to Roan ; but he was forced to retire with all speede, and if 
he had come sooner he had hardely escaped. 

Sir WiUiara Sackvyll is either killed or taken prisoner. He pursued very 
gallantly, and his losse is very much lamented by the Kinge and others, and I 
have greate occasion to to greeve for him ; he was my verie freinde and a gen- 
tleman of verie greate wourthe. 

From the enemies campe the Kinge is advertised that he intendeth to dis- 
lodge to morrowe and to approach as neare Roan as he can, to succor the 
towne ; fearinge the losse of the foot ; wheruppon the Kinge saieth he will 
also dislodge and to Clair, and so every day drawe nearer to his forces as the 
Duke of Parma cometh on, resolvinge not to levye his seege untill he be 
forced, or that the Duke of Parma be ingaged to fight, havinge passed the 
river of Neufchastell. If this resolution holde in them both, the battaile 
must needs be given with in 6 or 8 daies. Some opinion was conceived that 
the Duke of Parma would rather beseege Deepe, and so rather diverte our 
seege then raise it by force, and by that meanes also to intercepte her Majesties 
forces expected out of England by the Kinge, and the like from the Lowe 
Countreyes. But nowe it seemeth he is changed, and we directe our course 
accordinge to his, and coast his armie with ours. 

The Castell of Neufchastell was yealdedto the enemie on Saturday last with- 
out sufferinge breach, batterie or any shott of the cannon; which dothe 
greately discontent the King. The governor wanteth courage, and the Kinge 
saieth he shall wante no punishment. 

I am forced to end in respecte of wante of leisure, and yett was willing to 
advertise your Honour somwhat in respect of the matter, and the messenger, 
who can reporte things more at large. He is one of my Secretaries, and 
I am forced to send him, havinge no messenger that attendeth me, and all 
the rest of my servants beinge aUmoste dead or sicke ; my selfe have gotten 
also a feaver with this last journey, which I hope shortely to recover, wantinge 



A. D. 1592.] 315 

leisure and a fitt place to enterteine so badd a gueste. And so I most humbly 
take my leave, restinge at your Honors comandement, 

Henry Unton. 

From Buchy, this 8th of February, 1591. 



CLXIII. 

1592, 

8 Feb. "To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Faucheur." i 

Sir, I crave pardon for not writing, and remitt your Honour to my Lord 
your Fathers letter ; to whome I have written at large, havinge scarsley leisure 
to finish his letter, and to write shortely to my Lord of Essex. This last 
service dothe greately encourage us and daunte the enemie ; ^ and the Duke of 
Parma hath receaved a greate disgrace, and hardley escaped himselfe. It is 
bonum omen againste the battayle which is shortely expected, if the Duke of 
Parma march towards Roan tomorrowe, as he intendeth ; for by his first march 
we shall knowe his designe, and we prepare accordingly. We change our 
course with his, and govern ourselves accordinge to his resolutions. 

Our twoe armies doe but iU rest so neare together, for we are in a manner 
night and daie in armes, attemptinge one uppon the others quarter ; we are so 
neare as we must needs give and receive contynuaUie. The worst is our horses 
famishe, we wante meate for ourselves, and growe sicke. Myselfe have now 
gotten a fitt of an ague with this last journey, overheatinge and tyringe my 
body ; but either I shall quickly ridd it away, or it shall shortely make an end 
of mee. My servants are all allmost dead and sicken daylie. We wishe a shorte 
ende of this battell, and in the meane season we prepare to offer ourselves to 
all manner of miseries, and the dearth here maketh us paie fyve tymes soe 
much as before. 

' The Cottonian MS., Cslig. E. viii., contains a draft of this letter, at fol. 341. 
' Here the Cottonian draft begins. 



316 [February, 

If it were not for her Majesties service, I thincke noe worldly wealth could 
keepe me heare; I otherwise do wishe, nay more then wishe, myselfe in 
England, and shall love libertye ever the better ever after ; yett as longe as I 
am able to goe or stand, I wiU never be weary of her service. Rydinge and 
writinge doe nowe cast me downe ; wherfore I crave to be excused for my 
shortnes, and to be ever esteemed by your Honor, whose favor I hold most 
deare. 

And so in all hast, I most humblie take my leave. 

From Buchy, this 8th of February, 1591. 

Your Honors most assured, 

Henry Unton. 

The messenger is one of my Secretaries, he is more honeste then sufficient, 
and I am forced to send him for want of others, the post doe so ill attend mee ; 
and in this dangerous tyme my messengers should be well payed, wherof they 
complaine ; or ells her Majestie cannott soe well be served by me as I would 
and ought. Further this I beseech you, to my Lord your Father ; for when 
I would write I have none to carry my letters. Your Honor I hope will 
pardon this my bouldnes. 



CLXIV. 

" From the Earle of Essex ; by John Symons." ' 

My verie good Lord, I cannott send you better newes then that the 
Queene is resolved that you shall presentley retourne. She stales only to see 
what wiU become of Roan, of which shee dispaires, if shee doe not shortely 
heare good newes. Wee doe not heare from you once in 14 dales, neither from 
the Kinges Campe nor from before Roan. I doe assure you it dothe cause 
greate harme. The Queene did resolve to send the Kinge 1000 pykes, which 
he would have made 1200, but nowe shee will heare whether it be to late or 
' The original of this letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. 



A. D. 1592.] 317 

not before shee give order for ther imbarquinge. Your Lordship shall doe well 
to wishe the Kinge not only to solicit the Queene oftener in those things he 
seekes att her handes, but to acquainte her every day with his occasions. For 
ther is not so much gotten of the Queene by eamestnes as by often soliciting, 
accordinge to the proverbe, seepe cadendo. I will send you a resolution by the 
next poste. I wishe to you as to myselfe, and reste, 

Yours moste assured, 

Robert Essex. 
To my honorable freind, Sir 
Henry Unton, Lord Ambassa- 
dor for her Majestie in France. 



CLXV. 

1592, 

1 2 Feb. " From the Earle of Essex ; receaved the 23th by 

Mr. Harte." ' 

My verie good Lord, For your Lordships owne cause I can write noe more 
unto you then I did in my last. The Queene is resolved you shall come home, 
and dothe onley stay to see what will become of the seeg of Roan and of the 
Duke of Parma. As soone as the seige is levyed or ended, and the battaile 
either given or either side retired, I will send your revocation. 

Of the Queens minde you shall understand enoughe by the Lord Threasurers 
and Sir Robert Cecills letters. The Queene saieth I am to partiall, and dothe 
not beleeve mee. I wishe your Lordship more comforte in your service then I 
have of myne, and yett I have as comfortable words as any man can have, but 
nonpagano debiti\)']. I pray beleeve I wilbe ever. 

Your Lordships moste assured 
trewe freinde, 

R. Essex. 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Caljg. E. viii. fol. 173. 



318 [February, 

To my honorable freinde Sir 
Henry Unton, her Majesties 
Ambassador with the French 
Kinge. 

Endorsed, 

[22] 12 Februarii 1591. 

From my Lord of Essex, by Mr. Harte, receaved the 23 of February. 



CLXVI. 
1592, 

12 Feb. " From the Lord Threasm-er ; receaved the 23th, 

by Mr. Harte." i 

My lord Ambassador. The bearrer herof, Mr. Harte, hathe made very 
good reporte to her Majestie of soche things as he had charge from you to de- 
liver of the Kings hurte, and of all the proceedings there, on bothe partes, un- 
till his cominge away ; and hathe here continued longer then ^ his owne desire 
was, by reason her Majestie had a meaninge at the first to have sent some gen- 
tleman to have comforted the Kinge, and afterwards changed that mynde, and 
determined to write by this bearrer her owne letters of comforte to the Kinge, 
which she hathe done, and [they] are dehvered to him to be presented to the 
Kinge. Yesternight, after that the Ambassador had been here with her Majestie 
and had audience as he desired, he sente unto meea letter, written from Deepe 
by a merchant ther, to a freinde of his here in the Citty ; by which he adver- 
tiseth of a defeate given by the Kings horse to the vantgard of the Duke of 
Parmas ; wherin diverse should be slain and taken, as he writeth, and amongst 
others, it is written that a Duke should be slaine. The trewth herof is not 
otherwise knowen ; althoughe I doubte not if it be trewe, as I have good hope it 
is, your letters be on the way to advertise the same. The Uke advertisements 
we had by a common bruite, but of no other certentie ; by which it was repor- 

' The original letter is found in the Cottonian MS., Giilig. E. viii. fol. 145. 
' Here is the commencement of the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 319 

ted that the Duke of Guise should himselfe be slaine in this defeat, as havinge 
the leadinge of the vantgarde. 

Her Majestic hathe required the French Ambassador here present to require 
the French Kinge, in her name, to comande you, as her Ambassador, not to 
hazard yourselfe abrode in any adventurous service, wherby you might be 
either taken as prisoner, or otherwise endangered in your person ; for that 
shee would take it malum omen to herselfe, consideringe you doe there re- 
present her person. 

I am sorry to lett you understande that notwithstandinge the Kings often 
writinge, and his Ambassadors solicitinge of her Majestic with many ympor- 
tant reasons, to ycald to the Kinge more succors, in noe wise her Majestic 
wilbe induced therto, althoughe the nombers at the last required by the Am- 
bassador are not above 1,500, wheras 3,000 were first demanded, and after that 
2,000. I myselfe aboute 14 dales paste, did thincke that her Majestic would 
have yealded, and for that purpose made ready letters and warrants for the 
Queene to have sent over one or two thousand pikemen ; but when the same 
should come to signinge, her Majestic changed her mynd ; and soe ever sithenc 
she hath denyed it, with these pretences of reasons followinge. 

First, her former offence contineweth against the Kinge, for that this 
laste sommer he did neglect the takinge of Roan, which he might have done ; 
and yett wasted his owne people and her treasure to no purpose. 

Secondly, she thincketh so hardely of the Kings fortune and succes 
as shee is lothe, as shee saicth, to advcnt\ire any more of her people 
with him. 

Thirdly, she thincketh it impossible to levy and send any power out of the 
realme to be able to joyne with the Kings forces before the Duke of Parma 
shall force the King to battell. 

Lastly, wheras I saied to her Majestic very lately, that it were well done to 
send 2,000 of her men out of the Lowe Countrey, wher now in the Duke of 
Parmas absence ther is noe cause of service ; she answereth, she would be 
loath to hazard and waste those disciplined souldiers ther, that if need should 
be to have ther service here in England, shee should be greately dissapointed 
by losse of them. But finally, to conclude, I see noe possibihtie to induce her 
Majestic unto it. And therfore you must in your wisdome make the best here- 
of, and patiently beare with the importunitie ther, not forbearinge to remember 
to them the greate expences of her Majesties treasure bothe in lones of money, 



320 [February, 

in waging of men bothe by land and sea, and sondrey other extraordinary 
charges, wherof it seemeth they forgett to make accompte ; but in very trewth, 
bothe her Majestie and her realme are become there with very weary. 

There is come out of Brittaigne yesterday Sir Henery Norris, with letters 
from his brother and the Prince of D'Ombes, and with reporte of the meetinge 
of the Prince Conty and the Prince D'Ombes at Lavall, in the county of 
Mayne, where they concluded to make an armie against the beginninge of 
March, wherof the Prince Conty should bring 4,000 harquebusiers and 400 
horse, and the Prince D'ombes but 3,000, and 500 horse, and yett the Englishe 
forces should be parte therof ; soe, as it seemeth, the Prince Dombes cannot 
make that number equall to the Prince Conty. And yett by the reporte of Sir 
Henry Norris and the letters of Sir John, it is doubted that ther forces wilbe 
verie slender to encounter with the enemy, who presently is able to come into 
the feild with 6,000 footemen and 1,000 horsemen ; and it is certenly reported 
they looke for newe succors this springe out of Spaine. And hereupon her 
Majestie, findinge these Princes to weake without further succours from the 
Kinge, and unable to doe any service of purpose, her Majestie is in suspence 
presently of her opinion, whether shee shall send any supphes thether, wher 
ther are not above 1,200 servicable, or rather revoke them all ; to which latter 
pointe though she be much enclined, yett I mynde to staye the same as farrforth 
as I can, untill we may see the successe of Roan. And yett I thincke Monsr. 
de Perron, who of late tyme came from the Princes D'ombes hether, and so 
from hence thether to the Kinge, carried with him some hope by her Majesties 
answer that after the matter of Roan ended the forces ther should be employed 
in Brittaigne, if then ther should be cause needfull. 

Heerwith I doe send unto you her Majesties letter to the French Kinge ; 
at the deUvery wherof you must sale that the late writinge thereof sence her 
knowledge of his hurte hath growen by reason her Majestie had been troubled 
so much with a vehement could in her head this sevennights dale, as shee could 
not afore yesterday put her hand to the paper; and for that shee understood 
so speedely of the Kinge s full amendment, she thought it superfluos to sende 
any speciall person to visit him ; but nowe rather by her letter dothe frendly 
reprehend him for his adventures, with advice not to tempt God hereafter 
with the hke, as the Kinge by her letter, I thincke, shall further understand. 
And so I must make ann ende ; notbeinge able to doe noe more with my owne 
hand then to signe this letter. 



A. D. 1592.] 321 

From the Corte, this 12th of February, 1591. 

Your very lovinge fireinde, 

W. BURGHLEY. 

To the right honorable my very 
lovinge freinde. Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassador 
in Fraunce. 



CLXVII. 

1592, 

1 2 Feb. " From Sir Robert Cicill ; receaved the 23th, 

by Mr. Harte. " » 

Sir, In your last letters by Mr. Sherington did I finde your acceptation of 
soch poore offices as I have done ; your thancks are more then my meanes are 
worthe to deserve them, but nether place nor time shall chaunge what I have 
promised and you professed. The matter of Grimston, I must deale trewly 
with you on my faith, I have not bene privy to ; and for ill offices to the 
Queene done of you, I can send you noe grounde what they are, nor by whom ; 
neither doe I finde in her Majestic any thinge but moste gratious acceptation. 
She heareth by my lord of your adventuringe, like yourselfe, in all actions of 
perill. Her Majesties regarde of your good hath moved her to require the 
French Ambassador to write to the Kinge, to use his authoritie for your safetie, 
which you hazard to farr in your owne person. This sheweth her Majesties grace, 
and you deserve honor, bothe which I wishe you with all my harte, as 

Your lovinge fireinde, 

Robert Cicill. 
To my very honorable fi-eind. 

Sir Henery Unton, Knight, 
her Majesties Ambassador ^-ith 
the French Kinge. 

' The original letter is contained at fol. 371 of the same Cottonian MS. 
T T 



322 [February, 



CLXVIII. 

1592, 

13 Feb. "To the lord Threasurer; by Romano the Post." ' 

My verie good lord. I am sorrie to perceive by your letters of the 25th 
and of the last of January, bothe which I receaved this last night, that my let- 
ters miscarried, written from Bryteul, and that others of myne come to slowely 
unto your Lordship. It is the faulte of the messengers and of the tjrme, and 
my greife ^ which, I wishe I could remedie. I doubt not but by this tyme your 
Lordship findeth I have rather importuned you with my to often writinge, then 
neglected my duty in not writinge ; but I am verie gladd to perceive by your 
Lordships saied letters that my particuler and journall advertisements doe 
please her Majestic, which is my only care and best comforte. 

The lacke of names of townes in the French carte I have supplied with a 
more particular carte, which I caused expreslie to be made, to geive your Lord- 
ship better satisfaction therin. I could also procure a more particular to be 
sent to your Lordship, but it would be to tedious, and the other I hope maie 
suffice. I doe kepe a diarie memoreaU of all the places of our marchinge and 
incampinge, and of the enemy, and of all other things of vale we; and can make 
a discription in manner of topography of all our lodgings and marching sine 
the Duke of Parma entred France ; and have observed bothe the varieties of 
our marches and of our approches near the enemie and retraites ; so that I 
neglect not prediall matters, thoughe I observe most polliticaU ; of all which 
herafter I hope to make a perticular relation to your Lordship. 

The deathe of the Pope, ^ wherof your Lordship desireth to heare, is by 
letters of the enemies intercepted and in their army confirmed, and ther hope 
and our feare is that a worse will succeed him, if that Severino Madrucio or 
Cardinall Como be ellected, of whom it is sayed the choise must needs be 
made ; who are more Spanishe then the laste, as your Lordship best knoweth. 
I perceive my advertisements of the Spaniards cominge out of Britany is 
confirmed by Sir John Norrys letters, and that they embarque not at Nantes, 
but march over the land to St. Malos, and ther be shipped, wheruppon your 

' The original draft of this letter is contained in the same volume, fol. 355. 
^ Here is the commencement of the Cottonian draft. 
' Innocent the Ninth, who died 31 December, 1591, 



A. D. 1592.] 323 

Lordship conceiveth the lesse hope of the recovery of Roan, wherof, to deale 
playnly with your Lordship, I have noe hope at all, for that and many other 
palpable reasons ; yett I doe not dispaire of the forte of St. Catherines, if the 
enemie doe not verie shortely raise the seege, or we be forced to levye it, to 
give battaile, as I have lately advertised. Ther scarcetie in Roan is not so 
greate as it seameth your Lordship is advertised, for in our campe we paie 
thrice soe much for all manner of victuales as they doe in the towne ; and we 
shall sooner famishe in beseeginge them then they in beinge beseeged ; wherof 
I can assure your Lordship. The takinge of St. Catherines maie compell the 
towne to capitulate ; other hope we have none. 

Her Majesties refusall to yeald no more succors for the Kinge dothe daunte 
him and aU his counsell ; wherof I have delivered all such reasons as I am 
required by your Lordships letters. It seemeth moste strange to him ; con- 
sideringe the assurance his Ambassador hath lately given him of her Majesties 
promise of 1,200 pikes ; and he saieth he wille beleeve his owne Ambassador 
before mee. This contraritie doth very much perplex him, and I as yett am 
onley blamed. Hee saieth he feareth the losse of Deepe and of his king- 
dome, if her Majestic be no more gratious to him. I will not presume 
to move her Majestic contrary to her pleasure, otherwise I would dutyfully 
dehver my opinion ; and I wishe the 4th parte of that I have were sold for his 
supplie, rather then he should wante, or receave any overthrowe at this tyme, 
which I regarde onley for the publicke ; and would wiUinglie spend, fearinge 
the inconveniences that are like to come to her Majestic and to my countrey. 
Herin I may err, and doe wishe I maie soe err, I challenge nothinge to myselfe 
or to my judgment, but experience is the scholemaster of fooles ; and that 
which I heare, see, and knowe, maketh me so to thincke. My speache cannott 
diswade the Kinge from hope and demandinge, yett faile I nott to doe as I am 
comanded, and can better obey then advise or serve her Majestic as I ought. 

Your Lordships grave advise to keepe myselfe from adventures I will followe 
as much as this tyme and place will suffer mee ; but I must thus farr answer 
for myselfe, that I love perill as littell as any, and doe eschewe it with my best 
discretion. To live in a towne as Deepe, nowe we have so great an army of 
the enemies in our armes, is most dangerous, and as much unprofitable to 
her Majesties service. To live in the Kings campe and to stay with the bag- 
gage when the Kinge goeth to the warr, is bothe dangerous and dishonourable ; 
for the Kings counsaile, secretaries and all, doe weare armor and attende uppon 



324 [February, 

his person. And to be in the feild and not with the Kinge when he callethe 
me, wherby I may see his dirrections, were to render me unacceptable to him, 
and unprofitable to my selfe and to her Majesties service ; wherfore when I ad- 
venture, it is with the Kinge himselfe. If any mishapp should followe, it is not 
my faulte, nor I hope dishonor to her Majestic ; and my presence dothe some 
tymes wdthdrawe the Kinge from his too much forwardnes. This I hope 
shall excuse me, sithence this tyme, this place and these persons, force me 
rather to become a souldier than a discreete Ambassador. 

I moste humbly thancke her Majestic for her gratious care of mee and 
pittyinge of mee for the late misfortune fallen uppon mee in the breaMnge 
upp of my lodginge and robinge of me ; and it may well seeme strange 
to your Lordship, for so it did to mee and the Kinge at first; but since 
it is become a usuall thinge, and hath happened to divers of his counsell, 
and others in the like manner. Your Lordship desireth to knowe the manner 
of it ; which was this. In the chamber where I did lie, I had but a groome 
of my chamber ; all the reste of my servants lodged in the same house in 
other roomes. The chamber was uppon the grounde. The house, a poore 
thetched cottage, and the walls most weake. The theeves did and might 
with ther handes onlie pull out the stones without noise. I and my ser- 
vant slepte soundly, havinge travelled much the dale before ; so they entred 
without rumor, and tooke away whatsoever I hadd in that chamber. My 
best assurance was uppon the Kings gardes, wherof some were (as it was 
thought) privie. The like hath happened to others since, and I cannott 
discover the parties, nor recover any parte therof ; I am nowe forced ever 
sithence to keepe watch and warde amongest my owne people, and hope 
to be noe more so overtaken. I rather feare the enemie will by force one 
daie or night geive into our quarter, and take away all our baggage ; as we 
did lately to the Duke of Guise. This is also usuall. 

What to thincke of the Duke of Parmas hazardinge of a battaUe is very 
doubtfuU, and your Lordships opinion in the negative is verie probable. By 
my former letters your Lordship conceaveth whatt wee thinck here, and 
the pressinge the forte wilbe the only cause therof, if we continewe it when 
our late mine hadd taken verie good effecte, if it had not ben neglected by 
the Marshall Biron, who suffered it to plaie in the night, feared the enemie 
would have discovered it by countermininge before the morninge. It made 
a verie fare breach, which should have presently ben assaulted ; and it hathe 



A. D. 1592,] 325 

never ben seene amonge men of warre, that a myne hathe plaied in the night, 
or any breach assaulted but by daie. The men did ther duties and the 
fault was the Marshalls. They are directed to make twoe other like mynes, 
which shall play within fyve or sixe daies; and if the enemy permitt us, wee 
have greate hope of the takinge of the forte by our mine onley. The last 
breach is made up, and as stronglie barricaded as before. 

Captaine Grove, who hathe charge of her Majesties pynnases, complayned 
latelie to me for wante of victuall. He had receved some before and 200 
crownes in money of the King to victueU them for a tyme, which he did 
undertake ; and that beinge expired, he craved more ; so I went to the 
Ejnge, who presently gave commandement to the Marshall Byron not to 
suffer them to want. 

They doe verie ill understand sea causes, and the proportions and man- 
ner of victuallinge of them, and therefore were more wiUinge to geive them 
money then otherwise. 

The Capten alleadged he had a letter of revocation from your Lordship. I 
hope they shalbe victualled, and ther retoume would cause the Hollanders 
to doe the like, and then is the cause of Roan desperate if the Kinge 
receaved an overthrowe. I then feare the safe retourne of her Majesties 
pynnases. I crave your direction herin, and am verie unwiUinge to meddle 
with these seamen and ther matters. 

By your Lordships letters I perceive not the recepte of my letters of the 
26th, sent by Harte^ of the I st of this moneth, sent by John Mussy, of 
the 3, by Peter Browne, and of the 8th, by my French Secretary ; I hope 
your Lordship hath receaved them, for that I am advertised they arrived 
safely at Deepe, and were embarqued. What hathe since hapned 1 will 
shortly reporte. 

The 9th, the Kinge lodged his army aboute Cleare, and his own Comett 
were quartered in Cleave, the rest in the villages roimde aboute. Himselfe 
with a verie fewe horse wente to Dametall, with oppinion to attempte the 
forte and to see the myne play, as also to take counsaile howe to raise the 
greatest part of his seege, and yett to blocke upp the towne if the Duke of 
Parma should aproche neare Roan with his armie, as the Kinge was 
advertised he had resolved ; but the enemie did not dislodge that day. Att 
the Kings cominge to Dametall, he imediately went upp to the forte, when 
he founde diverse of our Englishe and French attemptinge to gaine a lodginge 



326 [February, 

allmost in the very topp of the forte, where they had the repulse ; and fortie 
of the Enghshe souldiers hurte and twoe slaine, and Sir Roger Williams was 
shott in his caske but had noe hurte. They all served with verie greate honor, 
but to smale profitt, and all the service was ill directed, and therfore failed 
in the execution. They had gained one lodginge before, without greate losse. 
The English were more hurte with stones than with shott, and without dan- 
ger of liefe or losse of member. 

That night at 12 of the clocke, the Marshall caused the mine to plaie, 
wherwith it is thought many in the forte was killed, for they made a very 
greate outcry. 

The 10th, the Kinge receaved advertisement that the enemy had sent 
all their baggage to Abeville, intendinge either to raise our seige or to gaine 
uppon the Kings army in their lodginge, wheruppon the King retomed 
in the night to his quarter to Claire. But this advertisement proved not true ; for 
the enemy had onley sent certaine carriages for victualle to Abyvelle, from 
whence he is continewally relieved, and whose passage we cannot impeache. 
His army is much better furnished with victuales than ours, and moste of 
our horses are allmost famished. We forrage four leagues of daylie, which 
doth harrie out our horses. 

The 11th, we rested, sendinge diverse companies to the warr to discover 
the enemies march or lodginge. They tooke many prisoners of the enemie, 
and advertised the Kinge that the Duke of Parma marched to a wood called 
the Forest of Cinqsens, where they encamped in the open feild neare unto 
Bellencombre. This was the first day of the enemies march from Neuf- 
chasteU, which he had before donne, if we had not geiven into the Duke of 
Guises quarter. 

The 12th, the Kinge wente to the warr with 400, accompanied with the 
Marshall D'Omont, the Count Soissons, the Duke of Longeville, and the 
Duke of Boullon. He did march from the breake of the dale untill 9 of 
the clocke in the night towards the enemy, who marched not at all ; and soe 
we retoumed without blowes. 

The Duke of BouUon was sent, the 12th dale, Avith 300 horse to cast 
himselfe into Deepe, fearinge the enemie would goe directly to beseege it, 
which was very likely ; for either he must com directly with his army to 
succor Roan to raise the seege, and the battell must followe, or elce beseege 
Deepe' to diverte our seege, which the Kinge is moste unwillinge to levie. 



A. D. 1592.] 327 

if he can by any meanes continewe it. Wee make warr rather by the eye 
then the eare, and the enemies course directeth ours. He maie from Bellen- 
combre take either the waie to Deepe or Roan att his choise ; and the Duke 
of Parma intendeth to take the lodginge of Bellencombre, where there is a 
weake casteU and a good village ; but the Kinge hath sent this last night to 
bume it to incomodate him. It is a passage upon a branch of the river of 
Neufchastell, as may appeare by the carte. 

This daie, beinge the 13th, the Kinge goeth himselfe to the warr in the 
aftemoone. Uppon the Duke of Parmas dislodginge and march, I will 
dispatch a messenger to your Lordship, for then maie we resolve which waie 
he bendeth. And so I conclude the joumall advertisements of the army, 
havinge noe newes as yett of the Duke of Parmas rysinge with his campe. ' 

It is advertised that Monser Espnon maketh a very greate levye of horse 
and foote, to the nomber of 5,000 or 6,000 ; pretendinge it to be for the service 
of the King, which is but a coulor. I leave it to your Lordships considera- 
tion. It dothe discontent the Kinge and fear them of the relligion. 
The Trumpett I sent to the Duke of Parmas campe is retoumed, assur- 
inge me of the death of Sir William Sackvyll, whose body I required by 
him, but he was buried before, with many others. His losse is much 
lamented by the Kinge and us aU, and not without good cause ; for he was 
as towardelie a gentleman as ever came out of England. 

Monsr. de Cliseaux, one of the Marshalles of the enemies Frenche Campe, 
was taken prisoner, a verie greate capteine, and is more lamented then the 
Counte ChalUgney ; many others also were taken by ours ; and of our par- 
tie 10 slaine and six taken prisoners. 

So leavinge to trouble your Lordship, in aU haste I am forced to conclude, 
cravinge pardon for my tediousnes and errors, and so moste humbUe take my 
leave. 

From Claire, this 13th of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comand, 

Henry Untox. 

' This portion of the letter extends to the bottom of fol. 356, b, in the Cottonian MS. the remainder 
is written on fol. 348. The top of that leaf, however, being destroyed by fire, the fragment com- 
mences with the words " and fear them of the relligion." 



328 [February, 



CLXIX. 

1592. 

13 Feb. " To Sir Robert Cecyll ; by Romano. " i 

Your Honors letters of the 21th of Januarie I receaved the 12th of this 
moneth, wherin it pleaseth you to contynewe your honorable course of kindnes 
towards mee, which I will never forgett, and hope to live to deserve some of 
your favors and for the which I will ^ never be unthanckfuU. 

My Lord of Essex doth assure me, by his letters of the same date of your 
Honors, that her Majestic hath resolved to revoke me, after the end of this 
action of Roan. It seemeth by your Honors letter you did not knowe soe much, 
and therfore I thought good to advertise you therof, cra\4nge of your Honor to 
second him therin, and to procure my noble Lord your fathers favor therin. 
Sithence it proceadeth of her Majesties gratiousness, I accompte myselfe most 
happie, and desire nothinge so much. Your Honor male crowne all your favors 
with this, which I crave. Before the end of this our seege I desire it not, and 
then I presume it wilbe obtained because it is promised. 

I am glad to perceive by your Honors letters howe much her Majestie 
aUoweth of my services, and of her gratious good opinion. If I hadd not bet- 
ter meanes then the goodnes of my service, I should despaire, but that which is 
of grace is not of merritt, and so I accompte it. 

Your newes of my Lord of Essex advancement dothe greately contente mee, 
for I finde I am verie much bounde to him, and therfore shall be glad of any 
honor he shall receive. 

It pleaseth my honorable good Lord your father to grace me and my services 
highehe, which I perceive by his owne letters, and am so advertised from my 
honest freinds. I can but honor his Lordship and your Honor first, and will 
serve you bothe with all manner of my fortunes honestly and relligiously. I 
humblie beseech your Honor to thancke him in my behalfe, for I dare not in- 
serte yt among any advertisements, because his Lordship sheweth them to her 
Majestie. 

^ The original draft is contained in the same MS. fol. 347 
' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



A. D. 1592.] 329 

His Lordship writeth that my Lord of Hertford hath given him thankes 
for me ; and in the postscripte of his letter it pleaseth him with his owne hande 
to assure me therof, which I protest dothe exceedingly comforte me amonge 
aU my misseries. 

By this tyme I hope your Honor shall finde you are rather in my debte for 
letters, then I in yours. I wishe I covdd shewe my love in greater matters. My 
ague hath lefite me with extreame toUinge, and soe for want of leisure, I most 
humblie take my leave. 

From Claire this 13th of Februari, 1591. 

Your honors most beholdinge 

Hexry Unton. 



CLXX. 
13 Feb. « To the Earle of Essex ; by Romano." i 



1592, 



My moste honorable Lord. Your Lordships letter by Symons I receaved 
to my no small comforte, perceiving therby your moste honorable care of me 
and goodnes, havinge procured her Majesties favor "^ for my revocation ; wherin 
howe much your Lordship dothe binde me, I cannot well expresse. I can but 
love and honor you, and serve you with my best fortune, which I proteste I will 
doe unfeynedly, before all the men of the world ; assuring yovir Lordship you 
shall never have cause to repent your favor towards me. And soe with more 
thanckfulnes then wourds, I leave to trouble your Lordship in that matter. 

When this greate action of Roan is ended, and the two greate armies broken, 
I expecte an Ambassador can doe noe greate service to her Majestic, but serve 
onlie for a cipher and a shewe. 

I am advertised out of England that your Lordship shalbe shortely advanced 
to honor, accordinge to merritt and wourth]nies ; for the which I proteste I doe 

' The draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 349. 
' Here the Cottonian draft commences. 

U U 



330 [February, 

more rejoyce then for my owne retoume, and as much for the publicise as your 
Lordships privatt good. 

It seameth by your Lordships letter that you have not heard from me in 14 
dales, which is not my faulte, for I have not failed to write every foure and 
fyve dales, and oftener ; as I hope by this tyme dothe appear to your Lordship 
by the receipte of my letters, if they miscarrie not. The contrarietie of the 
winde, the danger of the passage and slacknes of the messengers, shall only hin- 
der you not receaving of them ; and it is all my care to supply my insuflBciency 
with my diUigence. Also your Lordship may assure yourselfe that the Kinge 
faieleth not to solhcitt her Majestic with his often letters and with aU importuni- 
tie. I have also nowe to my Lord Threasurer written somewhat instanthe, for 
the which I feare to be chidden, as I have been heretofore in the like. 

The Kinge expecteth the 1,200 pykes, wherof your Lordship advertised him 
by your owne letter. I assure your Lordship they wiU not come to late, if they 
be ready to embarque. He demandeth of me whether they were come ; I was 
commanded by her Majestic and my Lord Threasurer to lett him knowe that 
her Majestic did utterlie refuse to send any att all, with the reasons of her 
refusal ; which dothe greately discontent the Kinge, as he saieth he will beleeve 
your Lordship before mee, and he hathe your letter to shewe fdr it, and the 
like from his Ambassador. I have not in my letters to my lord Threasurer 
named your Lordship, but the assurance his Ambassador hath given him. He 
willeth mee as your Lordship lovethe him to desier you to regarde him in these 
his extremeties. The course seemeth verie strange to us heare, and it impor- 
teth your Lordship verie greately in respecte of your letter, wherof he hath spo- 
ken to many. 

The Duke of Parma dislodged not from NeufchasteU before Fryday laste, 
and then marched to the forrest of Cinq Sens, hard by Bellencombre, encamp- 
inge in the field by the wood, where he is not yett dislodged. At Bellencombre 
he male either take the waie to Deepe or towards Roan ; which, is not yett 
knowen. The Kinge rather feareth the beseeginge of Deepe, and therfore did 
yesterday send Monsr. de Boullon with 300 horse to caste himselfe into Deepe. 
Ether he will beseege Deepe, or accepte the battaile, and seeke to raise 
our seege by force. The Kinge hathe given order to burne Bellencombre, 
that the enemie may not lodge ther, and this day goeth to the warr to 
discover. 

The myne att the forte hath plaied in the night by the Marshall Birons dir- 



A. D. 1592.] 331 

rection, whose feare was that the enemy would discover it by ther counter- 
myne, and so the powder lost. It was a verie greate error, for it made a verie 
faire breach, wherof I knowe your Lordship is more particularly advertised 
from Sir Roger Williams, who hathe served moste honorably and escaped 
hardely, beinge shott in the caske att the attempte to take another lodgeing up- 
pon the forte, wherin 40 of his men were hurte and but two slaine, manie French 
killed and hurte at the same tyme. 

We doubt not of the takinge of the forte, if the Duke of Parma doe not in- 
terrupte us, but it is the myne that must be the special cause therof, which 
within 6 or 8 daies wilbe seene ; for dirrection is given for two other mynes. 

I am forced to end in haste. And soe with all duty and thanckfullnes for 
your Lordships true favor and honorable care of me, I moste humbUe take 
my leave. 

From Cleare, this 13th of February, 1591. 



CLXXI. 
1592, 
14 Feb. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Painter. " 

My verie good Lord. Notwithstandinge my late dispatche, I thincke it ne- 
cessarie to advertise your Lordship that the Duke of Parma did not yesterday 
dislodge ; and hath this day marched to Cinq Sens, hastening all he can to suc- 
cor Roan, and resolving to fight verie shortely. He lodgeth his army in the 
villages aboute it alonge the river ; and intendeth to make the forrest of Cinq 
Sens his place of retraict, if he be forced therunto ; so that the forreste and river 
will bothe fortefie his campe. 

He meaneth also to gaine this lodgeinge of Cleere, and by forcinge us to 
drawe neare Roan to lodge our army more close together ; wherby restrained 
into a more narrowe compasse, we may suffer the more miseries and wants for 
horse and men ; and in the mean tyme he intendeth to succor Roan, or eUs to 
compell us to raise our seege to present the bataile, which he may then accepte 
or refuse at his choise. 

Twoe lackqueys were this day taken of Monsr. Villars, Governor of Roan, re- 



332 [February, 

torninge from the Duke of Parma with assurance that within fifteene daies he 
would succor Roan, or force us to levye the seege ; which the Kinge will not 
doe untiU the Duke of Parma be soe farr engaged on this side of the river with 
his army as he shalbe constrained to fight. 

This march of the Duke of Parmas to Cinq Sens sheweth his resolution to 
succor Roan, and to leave the seege of Deepe. Our feare was he would longer 
have temporised to see first the breakinge of our army. He taketh the best 
course for the Kinge, if he wUl accepte the battell when it is offered, which the 
Kinge hath cause to feare ; yett is he otherwise advertised. If the forces come 
out of the Lowe Countreis in tyme and any from her Majestie, I dare hazard 
my liefe the Duke of Parma wilbe beaten; yett is the event of battell to mans 
judgement uncerteine. The Kinge intendeth to goe this night upon an enter- 
prise of verie greate importance uppon Roan. 

The village of Bellencombre is all burned yesterday ; and Monsr. de Longe- 
ville was sent to burne Cinq Sens, who did not so well performe it as he should, 
for he did set on fier verie fewe bowses. 

I understand that your Lordship delivered a pacquet to a Frenchman that 
came out of Brittaigne since Symons departure, who arryved at Deepe with 
him, and saied he had a pacquet of your Lordships for mee. If it be so it is 
miscarried betweene this and Deepe ; wherfore your Lordship hath cause to 
write anie matter of greate importance in cipher and to deliver your Lordships 
letters to trustie messengers. Many daylie miscarrie, and more will hereafter, 
if the enemie take his lodginge and cutte of our passage from Deepe. So in 
all post hast, beinge ready to goe to horse to attende the Kinge, I moste humblie 
take my leave. 

From Cleare, from whence our baggage dothe not yett dislodge, beinge with in 
3 leagues of Cinq Sens, this 14th of February, at 6 of the clocke at night, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 
The Kinge is allmost throughlie 
recovered of his hurte, and endureth 
travell verie well without distem- 
perature. 



A. D. 1592,] 333 



CLXXII. 

1592, 

16 Feb. « To the Lord Threasurer ; by Edmonds. " i 

My verie good Lord. I am sorry to sende this bearrer my secretary with 
ill newes, to obey the Kinges importunitie I am forced so to doe, who is suflBcient- 
ly instructed bothe from the Kinge and myselfe of our proceedings, of the 
Kinges estate and intents ; wherfore I forbeare to dilate that by writinge which 
he can best report by mouthe. God disposeth our actions * contrary to mans 
judgement, and carrieth Princes crownes to and fro at His good pleasure, 
usinge the insolent Spaniards for the scourge of His vengance, which God 
divert, or also the tripple crowne will to much florishe with the decay of good 
Princes. 

I am very unable to resolve doubts and can ill forsee or forejudge things to 
come ; yett are my former advertisements nowe proved to trewe, and my feare 
nott without cause, wherin I was condemned. I have I confesse to much pre- 
sumed to speake plainley, and in dutiftdl sorte not only dehver my poore opi- 
nion, but humbly besought her Majestic in tyme to embrace more this great ac- 
tion ; not for temporall respects onley but for spirituall, and specially for her 
owne safety, which dothe collaterally depende upon the good successe of this 
poore Kinge ; and more for her profitt, in respecte that a smale ayde will nowe 
much profitt the Kinge and his countrey, when tenn tymes so much herafter 
will not wourke the like effectes. I subjected all my privatt passions to her 
Majesties, havinge none at all of myne owne, but as her minister to execute 
her will precisely. Upon your Lordships debatinge with this bearrer all will 
appear manifestly ; and Gods will be done with mercie. 

This bearrer is much trusted by the Kinge, to whome he hath imparted all 
his mynde, and given him letters of credence ; his honestie and sufficiency 
doth well deserve it, and they bothe excuse me for large letters, for I can add 
littell to his knowledge, and he hathe bene the only man I have used and trust- 
ed in her Majesties service here. He can enforme your Lordship of this late un- 
happie accident of Roan, and of all other occurrances ; whom I beseeche your 
Lordship to heare and credit. 

' The original draft of this letter is preserved in the same volume, fol. 358. 
2 Here commences the draft in the Cottonian MS. 



334 [Febeuary, 

The French Ambassador doth assure the Kinge of 1,200 pikes'; his letters I 
have seene. And of the cominge of the gentleman from her Majestie to visit 
him, I delivered the contrary ; which contradiction seemeth strange, and many 
conceiptes had of my wante of devotion to the Kings service. I beseech your 
Lordship to justifie me by your letters, or to his Ambassador. The Kinge will 
not leave to hope, and is only entertained therwith, and I wishe I had credit 
to persuade her Majestie to incline somewhat more to his good in this extre- 
mitie, albeit I knowe never Prince hath done the like to another, and so dothe 
the Kinge acknowledge it. But I leave this manner of presumption, and wishe 
the losse of my life might bringe any furtherance to this generall cause. And 
so in haste I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Claire, this 16th i of February, 1591, 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 
Your Lordships letter mentioninge the 
receipt of my letters by Mr. Hart and 
Musschy, 2 I receaved ; other matter it 
conteyneth none, and therfore I will 
not trouble your Lordship with answer. 



CLXXni. 
1592, 

16 Feb. To her Majestie ; by Edmonds." s 

Moste gratious Soveraigne. Your Highenesse refusall of yealdinge to the 
Kings demands for more succors, and the reason therof, I have debated 
at large, and did therin execute your Majesties wiU with all precisenesse, 
perswadinge him * if he disliked a farder deniall, to forbeare to importune 
your Majestie and to be pleased with this your resolution. I imparted also 

' In the Cottonian copy this is altered to the 17th. 

2 Musye, Cotton. MS. 

' A copy of this letter is contained in the same volume, fol. 351. 

■• The copy in the Cottonian MS. here begins. 



A. D. 1592.] 335 

as much to diverse of his chosen counsellors, wherof we debated longe and 
earnestly. 

To this negotiation the Kinge gave an unwillinge eare, and answered. That 
he merveiled to receave such matter from mee, beinge otherwise advertised 
from his Ambassador, who assured him by his letters of 1,200 pikes by your 
Majesties late promise, and that a messenger should shortely come from 
you to visite him ; and upon his retoume, a present aide of more forces. 
Wherfore he merveiled much of this contradiction, seeminge much discon- 
tented with me. Then he willed me to weigh what might be the issue of 
this refusall, and that his staggeringe estate required some better remedy, 
and remedies came not so soone as the mischeefes ; and in the middest of his 
large discourse, this unhappy proud sally at Roan of 1,200 foote and 300 
horse was advertised unto him ; also the hurte of the Marshall Biron, beinge 
shott into the legg, the losse of diverse of his commanders and souldiers, of 
his cannon and trenches; wherwith he was so danted as he could not 
speake. At the laste he buste out, sayinge that God had determined to plage 
him, and that the hower was at hande, and that his perrills were nowe soe 
apparent to followe, and so dangerous if they followe, as not only the losse 
of Roan was in question, but his honor and kingdome, havinge so greate an 
army in his armes, so badd disposed people, and soe many ill-affected 
Catholicks aboute him. Wherfore he concluded, passionately requiringe me 
to sende my Secretary this bearrer, to whom he would give letters of cre- 
dence to your Majestic and imparte unto him his whole estate, procedings 
and intents ; and requested me, as I tendered his good and well-doinge, not 
only to instructe him and send him, but sufficiently to doe it, as one whom 
he much trusted, and that this was nowe noe time to delaye. Wheruppon 
I replied, with as much trouble of mynd as himselfe for this late accident at 
Roan, and shewed him that as a pubhcke minister I was to performe my dewtie 
precisely, for the which I had sufficient warrant from your Majestic ; and 
that I durst not negotiate with him of matters accordinge to myne owne 
fancy, but accordinge to your Highenesse pleasure ; and I marvaieled much 
at his Ambassadors contrary advertisements. 

Concerninge his request for more forces, and the sendinge of my Secretary, 
I was fearful! to recommend the one or send the other, havinge receaved 
so absolute an answer from your Majestic ; notwithstandinge, by reason of 
this late mishapp and to avoide his imputation of lacke of wilhngnes in this 



336 [February, 

time to doe him service, I sayd I would doe my duty as an Ambassador to 
advertise, referringe all to your Majesties resolution, without givinge of him 
any manner of comforte ; and my Secretary should also be at his commande- 
ment, so he gave me leave to departe, and he imediately went to counsell 
moste discontented. To satisfy the Kings importunytie I am forced to send 
him, who is very well instructed of all things, both from the Kinge and my- 
selfe, and can more comodiously reporte then I uppon so shorte warninge 
write them. It is doubtfull to determine de futuris, and this cloudy tyme 
threatneth a verie greate storme, and without your Majesties gratious ayde 
this tragedy is allmoste at an ende. And so cravinge pardon for my bould- 
nes accordinge for my humblenesse in shewinge for it, I beseech the Almightie 
to directe all for the best, and longe to preserve your Highnesse in all pros- 
peritie. 

From Claire, this 16th of February 1591. 

Your Majesties moste humble and 

obedient subject and servant, 

Henry Unton. 



CLXXIV. 

1592, 

19th Feb. « From her Majestic; receaved the 23th, 

by Jacob Tiballs." i 

ELIZABETH R. 

Trustie and well beloved, wee greet you well. Although we have both 
trewly observed howe much the Kinge our brother hathe neglected the sub- 
stanciaU proceedinge in this late action, by makinge so tedious a worke of 
that which by the delay must of necessity fall by the weight of his owne 
burthen ; and although we have often by our owne letters admonished him of 
' The original is contained in the same MS. fol. 149. 



A. D. 1592.J 337 

the greate perrill he was hke to rune into by the same, (which if in tyme he 
would have foreseene, his case could not have beene in soe hard tearmes as 
nowe it stands,) — neverthelesse havinge understood particularly by your seve- 
ral! letters to our Threasurer howe muche he desireth our helpe att this tyme, 
and howe assuredly his weaknes dothe more apparently promise nothinge 
but dishonor to the cause and danger to himselfe, wee have thought good 
to lett you knowe that notwithstandinge diverse occasions given us to com- 
plaine of the treatyment of our subjectes there imployed for his service, yett 
out of our comisseration of his estate we have ben contented to give order for 
the present levyinge of 1,600 foote, which shall with all convenient speed be 
transported thether ; of which as we have thought good speedily to advertise 
him, havinge receaved your letters but yesternight, to the intente he may 
directe his courses accordingly, soe doe we require you to lett him knowe 
wee will exspect for the shorte time of their aboade, to heare that he wiU take 
more feelinge care of ther preservation then hetherto he hath done in imploy- 
inge them in aU desperate actions without such good regarde as ether them- 
selves deserved, or wee that sent them did expecte in requitall of our 
greate care of him and his cause, wherin we have never failed, to our greate 
charge. 

For our particular, wee doe comende your care and dUligence for our ser- 
vice, and doe require you to have soch regard of venteringe yourselfe as 
shal become a man of your place and stand with your safetie, of which we 
daiely heare you are lesse respectfuU then we would in any wise wishe you 
should, for the good opinion we hould of your desire to doe us service, for 
which by these we yeald you our thancks. 

Yeoven under our privy Signit, at our pallace of Westminster, the 19th of 
February, 1591. 

To our trusty and welbeloved Sir 
Henry Unton, Knight, our Ambas- 
sador with the French Kinge. 



X X 



338 [February, 



CLXXV. 

1592, 

19 Feb. "From the Lord Threasurer; receaved the 23th, by 

Jacob Tyballs. " i 

My Lord Ambassador. Three severall letters of yours came yesterday all 
at once to my hande, thoughe by sondrey messengers ; beinge of the date of 
the 8, 13, and 14th of this moneth; at which time (as still I am) beinge in my 
bedd, greately ^ pained with the goute, I delivered them to your good freinde my 
sonne, Sir Robert CeciU, to imparte the contents therof to her Majestie, as he 
imediatly did ; wheruppon soche successe hath followed, notwithstandinge so 
many former refusalls, as she hath ben pleased to helpe the Kinge with 1,600 
men, wherof the greatest parte are appointed to be pikes, and the rest musketiers ; 
as by her Majesties letter at this time written to you, and my sonnes, you shaU 
further perceave. All the possible haste as may be is used for the imbarquinge 
and sendinge them away ; so that I have good hope the whole or greatest parte 
of them wilbe imbarqued by the end of this moneth; and if God prosper them 
with good winde, I doubt not but they will arrive in good tyme to helpe to 
strengthen the Kinge. 

I am moste sorry to understande the losse of that worthy gentleman Sir 
William SackviUe, whose over greate courage and forwardnesse wrought his 
owne distruction ; if my letters of admonition and advise had come to him, as 
I perceave they did not before this accident, I doubt not but he had prevented 
this mischeefe. It may serve you to good purpose to be more warie howe to 
adventure yourselfe, wherin I cannot better advise you then I have done by 
my former letters, which I perceave you have receaved. And so prayinge you 
for this tyme to take in good parte my shorte writinge, occasioned therunto by 
this my infirmitie, I very hartely comend me to you. 

From the Corte, this 19th of Februarie, 1591. 

Your Lordships very lovinge freind, 

W. BURGHLEY. 

' The original letter is found in the same MS. fol. 147. 
^ Here begins the original In the Cotton MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 339 

To my honorable good freinde. Sir 
Henry Unton, Knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador in Fraunce. 



CLXXVI. 

1592, 

19 Feb. " From Sir Thomas Henage ; receaved the 23th, by 

Jacob Tyballs. " i 

Sir, I thancke you much for your letter and advertisements of the 8th of 
February, which came to my hands but within these 2 dales. Howe her Ma- 
jestic ^ conceaveth of your service, and what she meaneth to doe for that noble 
Kinge, you shall best understand by her owne letters. What I may doe to 
prove myselfe your trewe freinde, you shalbe sure of, as occasion is ministred. 
And soe by the haste of the messenger, beinge taken from further writinge, I 
ende with my best wishes to you and hartiest comendations. 

Att the Corte, this 19th of February, 1591. 

Your assured freinde, 

T. Henage. 
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Unton, 

Knight, Ambassador for the Queenes Majes- 
tic in France. 



CLXXvn. 

1592, 

19 Feb. " From Sir Robert Cecill ; receaved the 23th, by 

JacobTybals."3 

Sir. For the present, this is all I can send you word of, which this letter 

' The original letter is contained in the same MS. fol. 324. 

' Here the Cottonian MS. begins. 

' The original is preserved in the Manuscript already quoted, fol. 373. 



340 [February^ 

of her Majesties doth containe; wherof the sooner theKinge be advertised, the 
better I thincke he may governe himselfe in the action. Of your selfe ther 
is nothinge but honor reported. My Lord is sick and cannot write. By the 
28th of this moneth the men shalbe shipped^ so as within little time after, if the 
winde serve, you may expect them. God sende them good successe. And 
soe in hast I leave you to God ; this 19th of February, 1591 . 

Your very lovinge and assured freinde, 

Ro. Cecill,. 

Tyll yesternight your letters came not, and then did we receave three paquets 
at once. 



CLXXVIII. 



1592, 

19 Feb. " From the Earle of Essex ; receaved the 23th, by 

Jacob TybaUs."» 

My verie good Lord, I did send worde to the ^ Kinge not fewe [days] past, 
that he should have 1,200 men, which was then croste, but nowe he shall have 
1,600 for them. I pray God they come not to late. I wishe your Lordship 
all health and happines and good fortune. 

19th of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships assuredly, 

R. Essex. 
To my honorable freinde. Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassador with the 
French King. 

' The original of this letter is contained in the same MS. fol. 167. 
^ Here commences the original as contained in the Cott, MS. 



A. D. 1592.J 341 



CLXXIX. 

1592, 

20 Feb. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Mr Wright. " ' 

My very good Lord. The I7th, the day of my last dispatch, the Kinge 
rested at Claire, attendinge the newes of the Duke of Parmas rysing, who 
still incamped in the feild adjoyninge to the forrest of Cinq Sens ; but that 
night he marched with the greatest parte of his vantgard to Cinq Cens and 
Bellencombre, * with intent to raise our seege the next morninge or to thrust 
in succors into Roan. 

The xviiith, the Kinge, beinge advertised of the enemies resolution, dis- 
lodged with his whole armie from Cla3^e, fully resolved to give the Duke of 
Parma battaile rather then to suffer his seege to be raised ; and marchinge 
towards Roan, 2 leagues of, not far of Bellencombre, he placed all his caval- 
lery in battaile and attended the Duke of Parmas cominge untill it was 
almoste night, Yt seemed most strange to us all that the Kinge, without 
leavinge his seege and wantinge foote, would present battaile to the Duke of 
Parma with his cavallery and harquebusiers on horsebacke, which doe ordina- 
rily waite uppon his owne person ; but the enemies march was soe suddine, 
and the advertisements came so late to him, as, if he had bene disposed to 
raise his seege, he wanted time. Notwithstandinge, soch was his resolution 
and courage, as with this oddes he prepared to fight rather than to receave 
so greate a dishonor as to be forced to raise his seege, which might have 
proved most dangerous, if the enemy hadd continewed their resolution. Butt 
they havinge intelligence of all our intents, and beinge advertised of the effect 
of the last sally at Roan, retourned ; and fearinge that the Kinge would ther 
upon raise his seige, and so force them to a battaile, they retired with all pos- 
sible dilligence towards Aumale, and so intended to goe alonge the river unto 
Abeville. That night we lodged at Caille. 

The xixth, we dislodged and came to Bossy, and the enemy marched and 

' The original of this letter is in the State Paper OflSce ; the draft in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. 
fol. 357. 
' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



342 [Fbbbuar-x, 

lodged at Sinarpont, kepinge in that valley the directe waye to Abeville. This 
newes of the enemies course seamed strange to the Kinge and his counsell ; 
and fearinge that he made but a color of his journey, and so might suddenly 
invest Gournay, the Kinge sent the Marshall D^Omont to cast in forces into 
Gournay. 

The xxth we rested here at Bossy, and the Duke of Parma marched to- 
wards Abeville. The like dUligence he never made, and the opinion conceaved 
therof is, that ether he retoumeth to refreshe his army and so reenforce 
himselfe, or else resolveth to beseige Rewe or St. Quintin. We cannot 
otherwise comprehend the reason of this his suddaine retraict and dilligence 
used therin, he havinge neither raised the seege nor succored the towne in 
soch sorte as he should ; some he hath cast into the towne by stealth by xv 
and XX. in a company at severall tymes ; other succor they have none. 

Some hould opinion that eyther he is revoked for some speciall occasions 
in the Lowe Countries, or else that the Kinge of Spaine should be dead ; but 
the moste probable is that he intendeth to beseige some townes in Picarde ; 
yett is the Kinge advertised that moste of the French forces are disbanded 
and departed from him male content. They have demanded many pasports 
of the Kinge, and many of them promised to bare noe more armes against 
him. This may also be a parte of a cause of the Duke of Parmas 
retoume ; we can speake but conjecturaUy, for we understand not the mis- 
tery. 

The Kinge will continewe his seige, and resolveth to foUowe the Duke of 
Parma with his cavallery, if he beseege any towne ; and intendeth to-mor- 
rowe to goe to Damettall to give dirrection to his forces ther and to take coun- 
sell with the Marshall. 

By this tyme I doubte not but your Lordship hath information of the death 
of the Pope, for Aldobrandino, a citizen of Florence, is created Pope. His 
father and his familie were banished for speakinge to alter the goverment, 
and to restore themselves to their former libertie ; but it is thought that he 
was advanced by the Duke of Florence faction, and not by the Spanishe. 
This Pope was once an advocate and factor for the Queens mother of Fraunce 
and for her sonne, and advanced to be Cardenall by their meanes ; so that 
greate hope is conceaved of his better affection to this crowne and of his 
coldnes to Spaine. God graunte it. 



A. D. 1592.] 343 

And so havinge nothiBge elce worthy your Lordships advertisement^ I 
moste humbly take my leave. 

From Boissy, this xxth of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henky Untox. 

I humbly beseech your Lordship to favor this bearer, Mr. Wright, so 
much as to give him your Lordships letter and the reste of the letters to his 
colledge for soche allowance as is dewe to him from them since his beinge 
in Fraunce. He hath served me as a minister, and is a very learned, discreet, 
and vertuos man, and hath done greate good not only to my familie, but to 
the whole Enghshe campe. Your Lordship shall binde me greately herin, 
and he dothe very well deserve a greater good. So I humbly recommend 
him to your Lordships goodnesse. 



CLXXX. 



1592, 

23 Feb. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Simons. " ' 

My very good Lord. The Kinge is advertised from the Prince D'Ombes 
that 3,000 Spaniards are landed in Bryttany, whereat he much merveileth ; 
he rather thincketh the nomber not to exceed 1,500, or 2,000, and that they 
be ^ sent to reenforce the former forces, wherof most are decayed. 

A great galley of Spaine, called La Padrona de Bluet, is rendered to the 
Kinge of ther owne devotion, which newes contenteth the Kinge verie 
greately. Of these advertisements out of Bryttany I doubte not but your 
Lordship is better informed, and sooner, then we here ; and therfore I for- 
beare oflen to send our Bryttany advertisements. 

Out of the Duke of Parmas campe I am advertised of the confirmation of 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E viii. fol. 
359. 

2 The draft in the Cottonian MS. here begins. 



344 [FebruaeYj 

the creation of Aldobrandino, and that it is feared amonst them he will not 
altogether prove Spanishe. Honor chaungeth mens former conditions, and 
therfore theyr feare, and our hope is doubtfull of this Popes nowe disposi- 
tion. 

The Duke of Florence and the Venetians doe by letters promise great 
matters to the French Kinge. It is not so much for love, as for hatred to the 
greatenesse of Spaine. They have as yet performed no great matters for 
him, ther last succor of 600 horse sent to this aide were iU furnished and as 
ill payed, and not 40 of them lefte with the Marshall D'Aumont. They are 
all disbanded and many of them dead ; they suffer as ill miseries as our 
Englishe. 

The Duke of Monte Martiano his cavallerie is all disbanded or dead, and 
butt one company of horse lefte ; he hath lost many great captaines and com- 
manders, he hath almoste no infanterie left but his Swissers, and they have 
seised upon the Marshall of his campe, and taken him prisoner for want of 
pay- 
Francesco Aldobrandino, nephewe nowe to the Pope, had a companie in 
the Lowe Countreis, and sueth for the Duke of Monte Martiano his charge, 
whom it is thought he will suplant ; but that charge will shortely come to 
nothinge, for it will breake of itselfe for wante of pay and with the infection 
of this countrey. 

Monsr. de Mayne hath lately receaved 100,000 crownes out of Spaine, 
and did wright to the Spanishe King that the affairs of Fraunce, nowe his 
owne, did prosper very well, and that he should have noe cause to repent his 
expences bestowed in Fraunce; yet dothe he under-hande treate peace 
with the French Kinge, without the privitie of the Duke of Guise, whom he 
greately misliketh. They bothe growe weary of the Spanishe yoke. 

Our Reitters are not yett paied, and the Kinge hathe used me often to the 
Prince D'Anhalt to perswade his stale and larger patience, which I have 
effected ; he hath 60,000 crownes redie at Deipe and Caen for ther paie, 
and assureth them they shalbe paied within theise 10 dales. Her Majesties 
service hath not so much troubled me as this of the Reiters. For the paie, I 
doubte not but they shall be payed. The Kinge permitteth 300 tonn of 
wine to be sould to them of Abeville and Amiens, who were in verv greate 
wante, and that monie is assigned to their paie ; soe that then they shalbe 
throughly satisfyed, which will greatly further the Kings service. The 



A. D. 1592.] 345 

Prince D'Anhalt dothe often demand an answer of his last letter to her Majes- 
tie ; he expecteth thancks and some manner of kindnesse from her Highnesse. 
Monsr. Vitry is lefte in Neuf Chastell with 400 Frenche in garrison, which he 
hath sold for money ; he hath demanded a passport of the Kinge for 6 
monethes, and so doe diverse others of the Frenche. 

The 21st of this moneth the Kinge went to DamettaU to conferre with the 
Marshall Biron and his counsell, where they resolved to batter the towne of 
Roan with two breaches, and yett continewe their trenches att the forte, and 
to attempt that also. This course if they had taken in the begininge and 
followed it earnestly, the Kinge had longe before this prevailed. It is nowe 
throughly resolved; and imediatly uppon the arrivall of the forces of the 
States and ther cominge to Roan, we shall begine our approches to the 
towne, and within one moneth either take that towne by composition or assault, 
or never. It is thought that ymediately uppon the makinge of two faire breaches, 
the towne will capitulate, and rather regard ther owne good then the honor of 
the souldiors and comanders, and very greate hope is conceaved of our good 
successe if it goe forward ; but without some Englishe forces from her Ma- 
jestic, the Kinge wUl not be able to perform it. 

That day our army and baggage marched to Claire, and the Duke of Parma 
also rested at Synarpont. 

Yesterday, belnge the 22th, the Kinge retoumed from Darnettall, and with 
his army came to loge at Torchy-le-grand ; and the Duke of Parma loged at 
Gamaches, whether he repaired only to refresh his army, and to loge more 
safely ; assuringe himselfe of the raising of our seige uppon the last salley at 
Roan. He was advertised that 2,000 of the Kings souldiors were slaine at 
that saUey, and that the towne had no need of his succors, and that the 
Kinge could no longer continewe his seege. But nowe findinge the contrary, 
he intendeth shortely to retourne by force to leavy our seige, or by beseig- 
inge some townes, to divert it. I assure your Lordship the Kinge is resolved 
rather to lose his life then to raise his seige, and to suffer the enemy to take 
any of his townes then to levy his seige, if any forces come out of England; 
and so hathe he comanded mee to advertise her Highnesse. He will onely 
attend the Duke of Parma with his cavallerie, if he sitt downe before any of 
his townes. 

This 23th, the Kinge resteth his army here att his owne towne, and goeth 
himselfe to Deepe to take order for the Reitters mony, to veiwe his fortifica- 

Y Y 



346 . [Februaby, 

tions there, and to conferr with Count Phillip de Nasseau and the rest of the 
Captaines for the hasteninge of his forces to Roan. Of the Duke of Parmas 
disloginge from Gamaches we have noe advertisement as yet. 

The Kings hurt is shutt and closed upp, and he throughlie recovered, and 
never better disposed in health. He hath receaved from Monsr. Saldaigne 
advertisement that her Majestic dothe send forth with 2,000 men, which 
newes dothe greately comforte him ; and he saieth if it prove trewe, he will 
carry away Roan in dispite of the Duke of Parma ; he tould me that I had 
also letters come to Deipe. I purpose to attende the Kinge to Deipe, but he 
retourneth this night to his quarter, fearinge the Duke of Parma may make 
some proffitt of his absence. 

I did wright lately to your Lordship by Mr. Wright, my minister, and have 
had noe letters from your Lordship sence the departure of my Secretary. I 
have nothinge ells to write but of the hope of the shorte recovery of Marshall 
Biron, and that the pinasses have lately receaved 300 crownes in money be- 
sides victualls, and would have imediately departed if the Kinge had not ex- 
presly comanded them to stale. They are very well dealt withaU ; and I 
beseech your Lordship to comand them not to departe without her Majesties 
ftirther pleasure signified. I dare not take uppon me to command ther staie, 
and if they departe, the Flemings and French shippes with them wiU not 
stay, and soe the whole enterprise of Roan wilbe overthrowen. So in all 
haste, wantinge all comodities to write, I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Torchy, this 23rd of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 



1592, 



CLXXXI. 



24 Feb. 'f To the Lord Threasurer ; at the same tyme, 

by the same post, John Symons. " i 

My very good Lord, At my cominge to this toune, attendinge the Kinge, 
^ The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 347 

I did overtake this messenger with my former letters, by whom I thought 
necessarie to give your Lordship to understand of my receipt of her Majes- 
ties moste gratious letters of the 19th of this moneth, and of your Lord- 
ships of the 1 2th by Mr. Harte, and of the 19th by Jacob Tybaldes ; wher 
unto I can make noe fitt answer for want of leasure and fitt opport\mitie to 
have audience of the Kinge, who departed before I had receaved and red the 
letters, and is at Torchy within 3 leagues of this towne. I make all the 
haste I can after him, and wiU attend him this night to performe what her 
Majestie, by her owne letters and by your Lordships, hath comanded me. 

In the meane season I crave pardon for this my xmperfett answer, beinge 
forced to make an end of my letter in respecte of my hast to the Kinge 
and the hastenninge away by this bearrer. And soe I moste humbhe take my 
leave, beinge greately comforted with her Majesties most gratious regard of 
this poore Kinge and the cause, and of her princely care of so poore 
a wretch as myselfe, whom I beeceech the Almightie to make longe and 
ever happy. 

From Deipe, this 24th of February, at 4 of the clocke in the mominge, 
1591, 

Your Lordships ever to comand, 

Henry Unton. 



CLXXXII. 



1592. 

24. Feb. " To Sir Robert Cecill j by John Symons. " » 

Your Honors letter by Mr. Harte and another by Jacob Tibals I receaved 
yesterday, boeth at one time, att my cominge to this towne ; and by bothe 
of them I perceave howe your Honor continually increaseth my debt and 
seaketh all meanes ^ to burden mee ; so that if I hadd no wiU to be yours, I am 

' The draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 362. 
' Here commences the draft in the Cottonian MS. 



348 [February, 

whollie made yours by your most honorable favors ; wherfore I can but vowe 
my uttermoste service and trewest devotion. 

The Kinge departed before my redinge or receavinge her Majesties letters, 
who came hether onely to take vewe of the Flemish troups, which are very 
faire, and doe greately content the Kinge. He had newes of her Majesties 
gratious ayde befor the receipt of my letters, but this day I will attende him 
att his quarter, whether I make all the hast I can to performe what I am 
required ; and we are aU verie proude of this most princely succor, hop- 
inge nowe to possesse Roan within this moneth, which the Kinge will at- 
tempte with might and maine, and all possible dilligence ; intendinge to as- 
saile bothe the towne and the forte together. 

Her Majesties moste princely regard of my poore selfe and gratious accep- 
tance of my dutifuU mynde dothe mightely incorage me, yt is the swetest 
sauce for these sower miseries ; her pleasure and signification and honorable 
penninge therof bringe me more comforte then anythinge else can bringe dis- 
comfort. I can but pray for her Highnesse and sacrifice my life for her ser- 
vice, and my poore unfained love to yourselfe. God make me more worthy 
of her Highnesse goodnes and your favor. 

I am moste greved for the sicknesse of my moste honorable good Lord 
your father, whose lacke I beseech the Almightie we may never feele, for he 
will not leave his like behinde him. I beseech God to strenghten his Lord- 
ship, and rather to take 1,000 soch away as my selfe then soche a one as he 
is, who is, next to her Majestic, the onely prop of our longe florishinge 
comenwealth, and the best favorer of the generall cause, for the which he is in 
all countries much honored, and here in Fraunce moste. The poore Kinge 
dothe speake all honor of his Lordship, and doeth acknowledge his many 
favors shewed to himselfe, wherin he hath comanded me to make knowen his 
thanckiullnes, which I crave of your Honor may not be forgotten. And so 
in all haste, as one tied and bound to my noble Lord your father and your 
Honor, longinge to heare of the title of the place you so honorablie discharge, 
I most humble take my leave. 

From Deipe, this 24th of Februarie, 1591. 

Your Honors moste behoulding, 

Henry Unton. 



A. D. 1592.] 349 



CLXXXIII. 

1592, 

24 Feb, " To the Earle of Essex ; by John Symonds. " ' 

My moste honorable good Lord. Albeit I did write very lately to your 
Lordship yet can I not lett passe any messenger without a letter, to continewe 
my profered dewtie to your Lordship, to whome I owe more, after her Majes- 
tie, then to all the world besides ; and soche power hath ^ your Lordship over 
me, as to comande my uttermost service and best fortune. 

The Kinge hath ben at Darnetall to conferr with his counseU, havinge taken 
a resolution to batter the towne within this moneth, in dispite of the Duke of 
Parma. Your Lordship can best judge of these actions, and therfore I forbeare 
to deliver my opinion. 

Of the Duke of Parma, the Kinge is advertised that he logeth at Gamaches, 
and resolveth either to beseige the towne of Rewe or Corby, and so to diverte 
our seige ; or els to raise it by force. We hope he shall prevaile in neither, 
and the Kinge doth nowe sett upp his rest uppon Roan, and to continewe his 
seige. 

The Flemishe companys landed the 20th here at Deip, and are very well ap- 
pointed ; this day the Kinge came hether to receave them, and to viewe them, 
which dothe greately content him. They are very brave in ther gould lace, yt 
will shortely discouler ; they are not above 2,500. The Kinge departed this 
night to his quarter at Torchy, whether I attend him. 

Two of your Lordships letters I receaved at one tyme this day by Mr. Harte 
and Tybaldes, wherby I perceive the continewance of your noble constancey to 
the generall cause, and to my poore privat ; for the which I acknowledge my- 
selfe moste bounde. I imparted unto the Kinge the effecte of your Lordships 
favor and the cominge of a 1,600 Englishe; he is sorry he cannott write his 
his owne thanks, but within two dales your Lordship shall heare from him- 
selfe. In the meane season he comandeth me to let your Lordship knowe that 
he doeth hold himselfe moste bounde unto you for your honorable furtherance, 

' The draft of this letter, is in the Cottonian MS., Calig. E. viii. fol. 36] . 
- Here begins the draft in the Cottonian MS. 



350 [Febbuaby, 

and attributeth all his good to your favor ; which he saieth he will never forgett. 
I for myselfe can honor your Lordship no more then I have professed, and 
hope one day to shewe some better effects of my honest devotion to your 
service; accomptinge myselfe no mans but yours, and totus tuus, with life 
and livinge. 

My revocation after the end of this cause wilbe most welcome to me ; before, 
I desire it not ; and with your Lordship I should remaine a longe banished man. 

Soe in all poste hast, I moste humblie take my leave, beseichinge God to 
give you all increase of honor. 

From Deip, this 24th of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships most bound, 

Hbnby Unton. 



CLXXXIV. 

1592, 

27 Feb. " From Sir Thomas Heneage ; receaved the 1 1th of 

March by John Muschie. " * 

Sir. By this messenger I wishe I could sende you that which would sa- 
tisfie you ; but more then that we care, with all the speed we can, to send 
you 1,600 men, and that it lieth not in my power to furder that cause so much 
as I desire. I have littell nowe to write. 

Tochinge your particular, I finde your service very acceptable, and to make 
it to your profitt and reputation, as you deserve and it were requisite, you 
shall ever finde me a fiirderer, thoe a weake one yet a sure one. 

I wishe much to heare well of the Kings proceedinge, and it is looked you 
should write often therof. The best newes I can write you is that our best 
Mistress holdeth her health well. Ells nowe have I littell leasure for, but 
to tell you that ther is great apparence ther wilbe greate troubles in Scotland, 
wherof you shall heare more. Sir Walter Raugleigh hath his commission 
' A Copy of this letter is found in the same MS. fol. 320. 



A. D. 1592.] 351 

signed to goe on his voiage, and so hath my Lord of Cumberland, but they 
goe not one way ; God speed them bothe, and send you your healthe, with 
beste successe in all things you have to doe, and this bearrer to retourne to me 
with some good newes. 

Att the Court, this 27th of Febraarie, 1591. 



Your freind assured, 

T. Heneage. 



To my very freinde. Sir Henry 
Unton, Knight, her Majesties Am- 
bassador resident in Fraunce. 



CLXXXV. 



1592, 

28 Feb. " To her Majestie ; by Captaine Swann." » 

May it please your moste sacred Majestie. Your princely pleasure signified 
by your Highenesse letters of the 19th of this moneth I have accomphshed, 
remembringe the Kinge of his former errors comitted in the managinge of this 
great action of Roan ;2 acquain tinge him also with your Majesties present 
commiseration of his estate in sendinge a newe suppUe of 1,600 foote to his 
ayde, and requiringe his more feelinge care and better regarde of their preser- 
vation, without exposinge them to many desperate perills as he had doen to 
others ; wishinge for conclusion, that he had better observed your Majesties 
sage directions in tyme. 

Hee made answer with a free confession of his unexcusable errors, aUeaginge 
that this bitter experiene should serve him for a better waminge herafter, and 
that his future dilligence should make amendes for his former delaies ; not 
doubtinge of his good successe at Roan, nowe the Duke of Parma was re- 
toumed, and he thus releived from your Highnesse ; then for this your most 

&gt; The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 
363. 
' The Cottonian draft here begins. 



352 [February, 

gratious comiseration and princely supply, he saied his thanckfuUnesse was as 
greate as his debt, for greater it could not be, and lesser he vowed it should 
never bee, and that never Prince was more bounde to another for trewe 
benefitts receaved. His worde and his countenance did soe well agree together, 
as they did very lively expresse a manefest demonstration of a thanckfull 
minde. 

Lastely, conceminge his more feelinge care and dewe regards of the preserv- 
inge of theis 1,600, he protesteth he hadd heretofore, and ever would, spare 
and cherishe them more then his owne naturall subjectes ; and that he was so 
tied in honor to doe ; concludinge his speech with a moste earnest request 
that this fault might not be imputed to him. 

I then replyed with a recomendation of the advancement of them of the 
Relligion, as havinge it in charge from your Majestic accordinge to my In- 
structions in that behalfe, and did take occasion of the death of the Duke of 
Joyeux, wishinge that the Duke of BouUion might succeed him in the office of 
Marshall, that place beinge nowe vacant, and he well worthy therof ; wherunto 
he did barken most willingly, and saieth for your Majesties sake he shall 
receave any favor or good att his hands. He also desired mee to recommend 
Sir Ferdinando Gorge to your Majesties favor as a moste vahant and sufficient 
gentleman, to whome he wisheth the charge of a regiment of theis newe forces ; 
he hath gained here very greate reputation, and will prove a very serviceable 
gentleman. The Kinge also desireth to give good testimony of Captaine 
Swan his courage and good service done here. 

The Kinge is resolved to conclude a peace with his subjects uppon any 
reasonable conditions, they are nowe much inclined thereunto as himselfe, 
beinge wearie of the Spanishe yoake, they treate of peace on boeth sides in the 
heat of warr, and it is very hkely to take effecte ; wherof it pleased your 
Majestic before my departure to comande me to give advertisement from time 
to time. 

They of the Religion doe become moste humble sutors to your Majestic to 
tender the well doinge of the younge Prince of Condye, who remaineth as yet 
unbaptized ; he is the only expectation of them of the Relligion, and of soche 
Catholicques as love the state, and the Kinge is very well affected to him, 
intendinge to bridell his iU disposed subjectes and the Princes of the blood 
with the hope of this young Prince. Your Majestic may doe a very gratious 
deed to recommend his baptizinge to the Kinge after his owne Relligion. 



A. D. 1592.] 353 

I am very unwillinge longe to interrupt your greater kingly affaires with my 
tedious writinge ; yett may I not in duty forgett to mention the trewe and 
only comforte I receave of your Highnesse most gratious acceptance of my 
poore indeavors and plaine deaUinge in matters of so greate waite committed to 
my charge. My happines I confesse to be very greate to serve so rare and 
perfect a Soveraigne, whose favor shineth as well uppon the unworthy as the 
worthy, whose eares admitt no malicious reports against your poore servants, 
and whose mind is absolute and free to grace and disgrace with trewe judg- 
ment accordinge to mens demerritts. This is the only happynes of your 
Highnesse subjects and servants, who need no mediators, but may svifficiently 
depend upon yourselfe ; and this doe I finde and feele to my never-endinge 
comfort, which dothe not only encourage but binde mee to sacrifice 1,000 
lives, if I hadd them, for your service. 

I beseech the Almightie longe to preserve your Majestie amonst us, and 
make us dewly thanckfuU for so inestimable happinesse. 

From Blangy, this 28th February, 1591. 

Your Highnesse most humble 

subject and obedient servant, 

Henry Uxton. 



CLXXXVI. 



1592, 

28 Feb. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Captaine Swann." i 

My very good Lord. The newes of her Majesties moste gratious yealding 
to send a newe supplie of 1,600 to the ayde of the Kinge doth give him 
and all his good subjects a better taste in ther mouthes ; and if it please God 
to prosper him and his cause, ^ yt will abate the pride of his enemies and 

• The original letter is preserved in the State Paper Office ; the draft is in the Cottonian volume 
already quoted. 
' The Cottonian draft here begins. 

z z 



354 [February, 

greately endanger the triple crowne. If owtward words may sufficiently ex- 
presse inwarde thanckfullnesse, then may I presume to assure your Lord- 
ship of the Kings most gratefuU mynde for many highe favors receayed at 
her Majesties hands, to whose goodnesse he dothe whollie attribute the gene- 
rall good of him and his countrey ; and so doeth he make it knowen to all the 
world. 

He confesseth his former errors, and wisheth he had longe sence followed 
her Majesties counsaile; but he saieth the Catholicques of his counsaile 
have lefte nothiuge undone that might hinder the same, findinge his owne 
inclination to bende to much to her Majesties directions and fearinge his 
over much greatnesse, which he nowe feeleth to his prejudice. They yet 
continewe to crosse him in his resolution for the continwence of the seige of 
Roan ; and ther best argument is to assure them of a present conclusion of a 
peace, which thoughe the Kinge be apte to beleeve, yet doth he hould his 
honor to be to much ingaged therin, and his hope of good successe never 
greater in respecte of the departure of the Duke of Parma and his nowe 
supplies from her Majestic and the Lowe Countreys ; so that he remaineth 
constant in that resolution. Yet are his Catholicques nowe with child with 
newe projects to alter the same, wherin they wiU faile of ther ayme. 

The 23th, the Kinge retourned to Diepe to his quarter at Torchy, attend- 
inge newes of the enemies course, who dislodged not that day from 
Gamache ; he hadd many reports and much diflFeringe amongst them whome 
he sent to the warr to discover. 

The 24th, the Kinge dislodged from Torchy, and went to Envermeil, 3 
leagues distant from Diepe nearrer the enemie. That day the Duke of Parma 
disloged and marched but a league towards Pont Dermy, incampinge him- 
selfe in the feild that night, and takinge a greate alarum in his campe by soche 
trowpes as the Kinge sent that day to the warr. 

That day I came to the Kinge from Diep, and was appointed to have au- 
dience the next morninge. 

The 25th, the Kinge rested his army at Envermeil, and was advertised of 
the enemies marche and dislodginge nearer towards Pont Dermy to passe over 
their army with all diUigence, hearinge of the Kings approchinge nearrer 
them ; wheruppon the Kinge sent for mee to acquainte me with his advertise- 
ments and intentes, and to give me audience ; with whom I did negotiate an 
hower, and delivered to him as much as by her Majesties letters I was 



A. D. 1592.] 355 

comanded, not forgettinge to remember the Kinge of his better care of the pre- 
servation of these 1,600 Englishe nowe granted to his ayde, wherof he hath 
willed me to assure her Majestie, and that they shall not be imployed but in 
verie necessitie and with greats good respecte. 

The 26th, the Kinge disloged, and sent his baggage to Blangy; he 
marched himselfe 2 leagues beyonde it towards the Duke of Parmas army, 
and went to the warr with 1,200 horse. His light horse which had the vantgard 
incountred with Gryboval his regiment of 300, which are called the regiment of 
Picardi for the League, and were sent backe by the Duke of Parma to caste 
themselves into Newfchastel and from thence into Roan. This whole regi- 
mente was defeated, wherof 140 were lefte dead in the place, some of them very 
sore hurte, the rest taken prisoners, and not 10 of them escaped. Their 
Captaines were taken, and the CoUonel fled. All ther pikes, shott and baggage 
was taken without any losse of ours ; some fewe were hurte. The Kinge 
marched forward, intendinge to give into the enemies campe ; but findinge 
them strongUe incamped, and havinge not perfectly discovered the manner 
of ther loginge, he retoumed to Blangy very late in the nighte, takinge some 
straglers of Spaniards and Itahans prisoners, by whom he understood howe 
the enemie incamped and was quartered. 

The 27thj the Kinge went to the warr, with almoste 2,000 curasses and 600 
harquebusiers on horsbacke ; and marchinge towards the enemies quarter, 
he found they were disloged and marched away in the night without sound 
of the drumme ; wheruppon the Kinge followed them very earely with all pos- 
sible dilligence, and overtakinge some of the Swissers rereward, of the Duke of 
Monte Martianos regiment, marching, he caused some of his troupes to charge 
them, and so disordered their horse that garded them and ther foote, and 
killed 45 of them in the place ; the rest in disorder recovered ther vantgard, 
and so gained Pont Dermy before all our troupes were come to second 
us. But assoone as they were joyned with us, we charged the enemies horse, 
who came out to succor ther foote, forced them in disorder to breake into 
ther foote, and fought with them with pistoll and sworde almost amongst 
their ensignes and at ther trenches, without any losse, and but very fewe 
were hurte of ours. Ther Reiters that were on theyr right hande beinge 
intrenched and marchinge towards the rest, we forced to retire, and if we 
hadd charged them and hadd ben strenghned but with 3,000 foote, we hadd 
defeated the Duke of Parma and all his army. He never receaved so greate 



356 [February, 

dishoner, nor the Kinge so much honer as to give uppon ther army with so 
fewe horse and to beate them into ther trenches, havinge so greate an army 
of horse and foote. Diverse Spaniards and poore soldiers with ther fdr- 
niture were taken by ours, and we retired safely from them. Yt is not al- 
raoste credible that which was done, and the Kinge was in the head of all 
his troupes all that day with to much forwardnes. This gentleman the 
bearer hereof was present, who can make a more particular report therof ; 
he hath served the Kinge very well with greate corage and good opinion, 
which the Kinge desireth may be made knowen to her Majestic. 

Att our cominge to Pont Dermy, which is the passage of the river of 
Some, the Duke of Parma was ther incamped with all his army, havinge 
passed some fewe troupes of horse and foote over the brige the daie before, 
and all his artillerie ; the rest he intended to passe with all possible dilli- 
gence, which by this tyme he hath allmoste performed. The Kinge retired 
the 27th to this towne, restinge here all this day, intendinge to knowe what 
will become of the enemie before he departe hence. 

The Kinge is perswaded that the Duke of Parma, assone as he hath passed 
his army over the river, will beseege Bullen, or some other towne of his, and 
therby seeke to diverte his seige of Roan ; which he as yett resolveth not to 
raise. He cannot well foUowe the Duke of Parma further, havinge noe 
passage over the river of Some but Corbey, neither shall he be able to passe 
his horse over in convenient time if the enemie seeke to impeache his pas- 
sage ; but if the Duke of Parma doe resolve to beseige any of his townes, 
then after he is marched furder of, the Kinge may (and I thincke will) waite 
uppon him when he doth sitt downe before any towne with his army. Other- 
wise, in reason of warr, the Kinge needeth not to foUowe the Duke of Parma 
farther, nether is tyed in honor, havinge accompaned him in this manner at 
his entrance into France and departure, as farr as the ryver and passage giveth 
him leave, and havinge a seege before Roan. 

Many of good accounte are of opinion, and I with them, that the Duke of 
Parma retoumeth to putt his men into garison in the Lowe Countries and 
the frontiers of Fraunce ; and so am I advertised out of his campe ; as also 
that the French are much discontented with his unprofitable jorney, leavinge 
Roan stUl beseiged, which towne the French with him give out is nowe in 
desperate case if the Kinge continewe his seige. This breedeth iU blood in 
them^ and maketh the Duke De Mayne to incline the more to a peace. The 



A. D. 1592.] 357 

Kinge dothe nowe assure himselfe of Roan, if the Duke of Parma retourne 
into the Lowe Countris, which he beleiveth not ; but if he doe, we feare the 
retourne of the Dutch forces, who, (as it is sayede here,) have no longer 
licence to continewe with the Kinge then the Duke of Parma remaineth 
here. If it be so, the Kinge will wante foote greatly for his seige, and I feare 
also the want of mimition. 

Some speech is here that the Counte Charles shall take charge of the Duke 
of Parmas army appointed for Fraunce, and that he goeth to deliver it up to 
him. This seemeth not probable. 

I doubt not but your Lordship is better advertised out of the Lowe 
Countreis of these matters ; and by my next I hope to give your Lordship 
more certenty. 

The Count Soissons is gone to visit his mother, who is very dangerously 
sicke, and the Duke of Joyeux is dead, in whose place the Kinge hathe pro- 
mised the Duke of Bouillion shall succeed. I did earnestly move the Kinge 
for him in her Majesties name, accordinge to my instructions given mee in 
that behalfe from her Majestic to furder them of the Relligion in advance- 
ment. The Protestants here doe greatly desire it, and the Cathohcques doe 
impugne yt ; but I hope he shall prevaile, albeit with difiBcultie. 

Yt is advertised that the garison of Dreux is overthrowen by Monsr. de 
Humyers, who incountred with them, with the garison of Corbie, as they 
were passinge to the Duke de Mayne. 

Tomorrowe the Kinge goeth towards Roan, and logeth at a village within a 
league of Eu ; he is very glad of the Duke of Parmas departure and saithe 
he will use all possible dihgence in his seige of Roan. 

The greate Turke maketh very great preparation for warr this next yeare. 
They of Malta have required earnestly all Knights of that order here in 
France or elcewher to retourne to the defence therof, accordinge to ther 
oathe. Yt were happy for France if that army might be ymployed against 
the Kinge of Spaine, which the Kinge here dothe hartely wishe. 

The Kinge requireth me in his name to recomend Sir Ferdinando Gorge 
to her Majesties goodnesse to have charge of a regiment of foote ; he is a 
very sufficient gentleman, and hath gained very greate reputation for his va- 
lour and conduct in war. 

Soe leavinge farther to trouble your Lordship, I moste humbly take my 
leave. 



358 [February, 

From Blangy, this 28th of February, 1591. 

Your Lordships ever to comand, 

Henry Unton. 



CLXXXVII. 



1592, 

28 Feb. " To Sir Robert Cecill; by Captaine Swan." &gt; 

Sir. The Duke of Parmas departure, havinge passed the river of Some, 
dothe give us more ease and more life. If he retourne into the Lowe Coun- 
tries, which is moste probable, then shall we take Roan, or never. The 
Kinge doubteth not of good successe if our 1,600 come in tyme. I hope 
well, yett with some doubte. I rather beleeve^ the pressinge of it may 
bringe a conclusion of a peace in Fraunce, wherunto bothe parties are very 
greately inclined ; hoc opus, hie labor est. 

We make all diligence towards Roan, and march away to-morrowe from 
this place. The Kinge desires the hasteninge of her Majesties newe supplies, 
and is moste thanckfull for the same. 

The Duke of Joyeux is dead, and the Duke of Bouillon like to succeed 
him in the office of Marshall, which the Papists altogether impugne ; but 
the Kinge is well enclined therunto ; they of the Religion doe greately de- 
sire it. 

I longe to heare some good newes of the title of that place you execute ; 
the world dothe give it you, and the poore Kinge dothe vnshe it you from his 
harte ; none hath so much reason to wishe it, your Honor, as myselfe ; and 
I beseech you, be pleased to lett me knowe your good hap, which you wor- 
thelie merritt. 

My letter to her Majestie dothe excuse me for longe letters at this tyme to 
your Honor; wherof I conclude, cravinge of you to conserve me in her 

1 The draft of this letter is in the Cottonian MS. already cited, fol. 367. 
' Here is the commencement of the draft. 



A. D, 1592.] 359 

Majesties favor and to esteeme mee yourselfe as you were wont ; for I will 
ever honor you with the selfesame affection I first vowed. Soe in hast, I 
moste humbly take my leave. 

From Blangy, this 28th of Feb. 1591. 

Your Honors unfained frend 

to comande 

Henry Unton. 



CLXXXVIII. 



1592, 

3 Mar. " To Sr. John Norris ; by Jacob Tiballs." i 



and thereby incensed the King. I never failed to st . 
to take uppon me to answere in your behalfe, and to assure the King of 
ble good disposition to doe him service, whereof, nowe, his Majestic hath 
opinion, and if any good opportunitie had offered itselfe unto me . 
I might have ben assured of the saufe delivery of my lettres, I had 
sence advertised your Lordship thereof, and taken occasion to entertaine all . 
offices of frendshipe to doe you service, protestinge unfainedly that y 
ever comand me at your pleasure. Yt pleased my Lord Tresorer to give 
your ciphar, wherby I might advertise your Lordship of any matters concer 
her Majesties service, if your Lordship will use it in speciall matters to me as I 
. the like, we may the more safely expresse our myndes hereafter. 

I have not failed to recommend the good usage of Montmartin to the 
for the which he hath had thankes ; and I asure yonr Lordship he giveth you 
dew and honorable report, which hath made a better impression in the 

The King hath promised to wright soch letters to the governors of 
provinces as your Lordship requireth, conceminge their receavinge of 
En&lt;^lishe into their garisons ; and by a placard also intendeth exp . 
' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 347. 



360 [FbbruarYj 

to forbid the same ; so that it shalbe redie whensoever you requite it . 
delivered to Montmartin, or any other whom your Lordship pleasure to appoynt 
. . . receave it. 

So offeringe my best service to your Lordship in greater matters 
commit your Lordship to the Almightie, not forgettinge my dewtie to my 
hon . . . good Lord your father and my Lady, to whom I have written 3 
letters . . never receaved aunswere of the receipt of them. 

From Diepe in . . this 3 of March, 1591. 

Yor Lordships ever to command, 

H. U. 



CLXXXIX. 

1592, 

3 Mar. "To the Lord Threasurer; by Jacob Tibals. " i 

My very good Lord. The Kinge is advertised that the Duke of Parma 
marcheth to Rue to beseige it or Bullen, and intendeth not to retourne before 
the seege of Roan be raised, which, by reason of war as he thincketh, will not 
continewe longer in respecte of the ^ late succors entred into Roan, beinge five 
ensignes to the number of 600, wherof 300 are Spaniards and Wallons • not- 
withstandinge the Kinge seemethe resolute to assaile the towne itsehe by 2 
or 3 severall breaches, albeit his Catholicques doe mightely oppose themselves 
against such his resolution. 

They of Rue have burned ther suburbs, and the governor, Monsr. Rubampre 
wanteth nether corage nor meanes for the defence therof, and the place is in- 
dyfferently well fortefied, and in this winter tyme not soprennable; the* enemy 
havinge but one passage to come to it. 

The Duke of Parma dothe in these partes refreshe his army very much, and 
by his temporisinge seaketh to weary us out, and to bringe us into all manner 
of wants, expectinge the departure of the French noblesse, who disband daily 

1 The original letter is preserved in tlie State Paper Office ; a copy is in the Cottonian MS. CaUe E 
viii. fol. 277. 

^ The Cottonian copy here begins. 



A. D. 1592.] 361 

and will not be detained ; and when he perceaveth Roan to be more pressed 
by us then to retourne to force us to levy our seige. 

What to advertise certenly, either of the enemies course or ours, I knowe not ; 
nether dare I, findinge so much inconstancy in them both and such variety and 
change of resolutions. That which I feare, for our parte, is that the Kinge, 
(fearinge the Duke of Parmas staie and retoumCj and findinge his owne wants 
of men and munition requisite for so greate a seege,) may be drawen rather 
to spend his tyme in beseiginge other places, and so to blocke the towne afarr 
of, then to take Roan speedely by force ; wherunto I knowe moste of his 
chosen counsellors are inchned, albeit the Kinge and others perswade me 
the contrary ; this is but my feare, for the which I want not many reasons, 
wherin I wishe I may erre. 

We have here a greate alarum of peace by the cominge of La Chastre from 
the League to broche the same ; he hadd the Kings pasport to come. The 
better sorte doe conceave of him to be a hinderer and noe furtherer therof, and 
to respecte his particular more then the pubUcke, By the warres he spendeth 
50,000 crownes by the yeare, wheras by peace he reapeth but 10,000 crownes ; 
he is not acceptable to the King, and is reputed a faythlesse man. Yt is rather 
thought that Grammont shall come to treate of particularities betweene the 
Kinge and Monsr. De Mayne, and then propose the generall, which course is 
moste hkely to take efiecte. 

La Chastre proposeth first to have the Kinge a Catholique ; then to restore 
the house of Lorraine to ther former dignities, and to match the Kinge in 
marriadge with a daughter of the Duke of Lorraine ; lastly, to exclude them of 
the Relligion from all manner of advancement, wherin the royalist Catholicques 
doe urge them of the League to insist. By these unreasonable demands La 
Chastre his badd affection is discovered, and little hope as yett is conceaved ; 
the cominge of more indifferent and temperat men dothe give more hope ; but 
this is to be noted, that the Leaguers offer to chase out the Spaniards and to 
conclude this peace without comprehendinge them in it. By my next letters 
I hope to give a better gesse of this matter and of the action of Roan. In the 
meane season I thought it necessarie not to omitt thus much, assuringe your 
Lordship that bothe parties are greedy of a peace and tired ^^•ith warr, and 
that the greatest townes are weary of ther insupportable expences, and Paris 
moste. 

A great parte of the wall of the towne of Roan is fallen downe, in lenght 

AAA 



362 [February, 

fortie pases, to the greate amasement of them ; wheruppon Villars assembled 
them together, usinge perswations to them to make a composition with 
the Kinge, alleaginge that these late succors which entred were not sufficient 
for ther defence, and that the Duke of Parma was retired and the Kinge re- 
solved to batter the towne. Upon which speach 60 of the Burgesses best in- 
clined to the Kinges service made answer of ther wiUingnesse to yeald to his 
motion, allowinge greately the same ; of whom the Governore takinge good 
marke, sent for them from ther howses severally and tooke them prisoners, 
forcinge them to pay greate ransomes at his pleasure. This dothe greately 
discontent the Burgesses, not only of that towne but of others, and I will hope 
in the ende tourne much to the Kings proffitt ; albeit in the meane tyme 
Villars doth greatly serve his owne tourne therby. 

Monsr. La Vallete, elder brother to the Duke Espernon, was slaine with a 
shott beseeginge of a badd place in Provence ; he was a good servant to the 
King. The Duke Espernon had expressly sent to the Kinge to request him 
to stay the gyft of the governement of Provence untill he be better advertised 
from him, wherunto the Kinge gave an unplesinge aunswer, wishinge him not to 
teach him what he should doe ; notwithstandinge stale is made therof, and the 
Kinge hath written to Alphonso Corsa to have care of the countrey, not givinge 
him any other comission but by letter. The Kinge hath also broken the accord 
betweene Monsr. St Luc and the Duke of Espernon for the exchange of 
Brouage, wherof I did heretofore advertise your Lordship at large. 

Marseilles houldeth nowe for the Kinge against the League by the meanes of 
the countesse of Saulx, and Monsr. De Deguieres is commanded to make all 
preparation to levy forces to make warr in Savoy very shorteley. He would 
willingly be Governor of Dolphyne, and procure Alphonso Corsa to be Gover- 
nor of Provence. The Baron of Biron sueth for it, who it is thought shall pre- 
vaile. 

The Governor of Le Capellett is dead, and Monsr. Lyremont, who is of the 
Religion, hath the Government given him ; wherat the Papistes doe very much 
storme. I did procure it of the Kinge for him, and the Governor of St. Jean 
d' Angely is said to be dead, and the Kinge hath given the government ther- 
of to Monsr. La Noue ; also Monsr. de BoulUon shall, within 3 or 4 dales, 
be sworne Marshall of Fraunce, wherunto the CathoUckes in owtward shewe 
seeme willinge, albeit they secretly invay much against it. 

The towne [of) Langres in Bassigny, uppon the fontiers of Burgundy, failed 
surprisinge very lately by them of the League, who had gained one of the ports 



A. D. 1592.] 363 

by intelligence and entred the towne, but were repulsed with losse of 500 or 
600 on bothe sides. Yt is a mayden towne, of greate strengthe and impor- 
tance. The comon people in moste of these townes are Leaguers, and the 
Kinge forced to a great charge therby to keepe garisons in moste of his townes, 
which notwithstandinge the Kinges officers and his finances would withdrawe, 
and with that exepence mainteyne an armie continually in the feild of 12,000, 
wheras the Kinge payeth above 40,000 in garrison ; so might hee shortely 
lose all his townes. 

The Barron of Biron went lately to surprise NeufChastell, wherof the enemie 
was before advertised, and so failed ; the Kinge hath more traitors amongest 
his followers then against him with the League, which he no we confesseth. 
He hath given the office of Monsr. L'archant, who was laste Captaine of his 
gards, to Monsr, Praljm sence his death, he died of his hurte in the late sally 
att Roan. 

The 29th, the Kinge dislodged from Blangy and lodged that night at Crys, 
a paltery village ; the next daie he came to this towne, wher he hath conti- 
newed ever since to provide monny for his Reytters, and to make preparation 
for his seige at Roan. He hathe bene very ill seince his coming hether, and 
feareth he is poisoned, which is but his owne jelousie without cause ; his physi- 
tians have very good hope of his shorte recovery, he stayeth here untill Munday 
next. 

Soe in all haste I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Diepe, this 3rd of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships ever to comande, 

Hknry Unton. 



CXC. 

1592, 

3 Mar. " To Sir Robert CecUl ; by Jacob Tyballs." 

Sir, This bearrer dothe desier a testimoniall of his dilligence used in the 



364 [February, 

bringinge of her Majesties late dispatch. He arrived here the 23th and made 
very good hast, and hath ever since followed me in the camp. I could not 
denie him so smale a requeste, and am gladd to take any occasion to write 
unto your Honor. 

My best frends doe continually advertise me howe much I am bound to your 
Honor for your many favors to ray poore selfe. I confesse my debt to be 
greater, but my love cannot increase, being long sithence sufficiently bound 
and tied to be yours, and so vowed myselfe. 

By my letters to my most honorable Lord your father your Honor may 
perceave the course of things here, which is very bad for us. Nowe we are at 
the worst, I hope it will mend. We have as many hinderers amonst ourselves 
as fiirderers, and never poore Kinge was so ill served ; which he now feeleth 
to his smart. 

So leavinge further to trouble your Honor, wishinge you all increase of 
honor, to your own harts desire, I most humbly take my leave. 

Your Honors wholly to comand, 

Henry Unton. 



CXCI. 

1592, 

5 Mar. " From the Lord of Essex ; receaved the 19th 

by ... "1 

My very good Lord, I nowe only write to ^ salute you ; for this solitary 
place doth yeald me noe newes. I perceave by your Lordships letters thatt the 
Duke of Parma is retired. Uppon my retourne to the Courte I will urge your 
Lordships revocation. I pray you preserve me in the favor of the Duke of 
Bouillon, and tell him I am divorced from my greatest contentment, in that I 

' The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 159. This blank occurs in both the 
Eodleian transcript and the Cottonian original. 
^ Here the Cottonian copy begins. 



A. D. 1592.] 365 

am absent from him. I wish to your Lordship as to myselfe, and so take my 
leave. 

Wansteed, this 5 th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships most assm-ed freind, 

R. Essex. 
A Monsieur 
Monsieur Unton, Embassadeur pour 
sa serenissime Majeste, en France. 



CXCIL 
1592, 

8 Mar. " To the Right Honorable Sir Henrye Umpton, Knight, 

her Majesties Embassadour in Fraunce." ' 

honorable my verie good Lord. 

Browne the Poast to be sent over, I would not 

fewe lines to advertise your Lordship of our safe arriva 

being so late sithence, as that as yet ther ys not anie 

determined by her Majestic for her service ia Brittaigne .... 

wherof I might Ukewise give you to understand. 

If yor Lordship hath not as yet moved the Kinge, of that which I lateUe 
wrott unto you ; that those that have goverm . . and comaunde of 

anie townes or places within those provin . . neer to Brittany maie 
not enterteine anie soldiers that shall rome from us thether ; or if by his 
answere (which you maie perceive) that it shall be requisite to have her 
Majesties letters procured to the same effect ; I praie your Lordship to let me 
under [stand] thereof. 

And so assureing your Lordship to informe you as occasion maie a 
waies offer of that that passethe here, I rest your Lordship 
in whatsoever services I maie most affectionate. 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 392. 



366 [February, 

From my howse at Puddle Wharfe, London, the viij.th of M[arch], 159[2]. 

Your Lordships at comaundement, 

J. NORRIS. 



cxcin. 

1592, 

8 Mar. " To my honorable good Lord, the Lord Imbassadour for 

her Majestie in Frauns." ^ 



I . . . . you infinitely for the sa . . 
your grete love and kindness shewed .... 
decesed soon ; who if we might have .... 
wold I am sure have remained m .... 

though his power had ben never so 

but the Lordes wil be doon, sins thus .... 

dales by this infortunat desteny ar ev . 

And perceving by Mr. Edmundes and .... 

soons men that you have retained ..... 

gray horse and saddel in your handes .... 

purpose to pay for him such price ..... 

resonable, like as the grete cha ..... 

which I have ben at for him have 1 . 

yet in det for him l,600li., he wold .... 

otherwise gladly have bestowed his 

he ben twise so good upon you, but .... 
my grete det for him inforseth m . . . . . 
make the most of such horse as he 

wherof this was the cheif, he co 

England iiij.^""' besides the saddel, and 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 175. 



A. D. 1592.] 367 

was informed by his men he was oflfired 

iiij/' crownes ; so as I have thought it 

to desier of you the only some he cost na 

iiij."*"* though I know him of far more va 

1 have written to Mr. Otwel Smith to rece 

said iiij ."='•''• of you and to employ the same about 

my power I recomend you 

. . . 8 of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships very loving 

and assured frend, 

T. BUCKEHURST. 



CXCIV. 

1592. 

9 Mar. " To the lord Threasxu-er ; by Charles Jaspar. " ' 

My very good Lord. The Kinge is advertised that the Duke of Parma 
hath invested and beseigeth Rue, and remaineth hymselfe at Novion, not ^ far 
fiom Abeville. Notwithstandinge this advertisement the Kinge doubteth 
therof, in respect of this late wet wether and of the entry of Compagnol to 
the succor of the towne with men and munition sent from the Kinge ; but it 
is more probable that it is beseeged. 

The Duke of Parma his army is very much harried and allmoste all his 
French disbanded ; he expecteth a newe supphe out of the Lowe Countreies, 
and attendeth the Kinges successe at Roan, resolvinge to retoume to levie our 
seige when the towne is pressed ; and in the meane season to refreshe his 
army and to take some of the Kinges townes by seige. 

Uppon Monday last the Kinge went towards Roan, and lodged that night 

' The original of this letter is contained in the State Paper Office ; the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. 
fol. 284. exhibits a contemporaneous copy. 
- Here begins the Cottonian transcript. 



368 [February, 

at Claire, wher he receaved advertisement, of a greate defeate given to the 
enemie in Champagne, wherin 4 companies of foote were overthrowne ; also 
it was advertised that the Duke of Lorraine prepareth all his forces to 
beseige Astenay. 

Yt pleased the Kinge to requier me to stay here untill the coming of her 
Majesties newe succors, to take order for ther wants and to hasten them 
to Roan ; for that, as he saieth, he will begine to make his approches to the 
towne and use all possible dilligence and that with expedition, to the batter- 
inge of the towne. Also he intendeth to fortefie Kilbouf, a place that 
comandeth the river of Some, in soch sorte as nothinge should then passe 
from Newe Haven to Roan by water. He was partely of opinion duringe the 
tyme of makinge his approches to send 2,000 or 3,000 men to take in Neuf- 
chastell, Feckam, Harfleu, and Honfleur, thinckinge by that meanes to blocke 
Roan, and so to take it in tyme rather then presently to batter it, fearinge the 
Duke of Parmas retourne to levy his seege when Roan were in danger. Yt is 
strange to many here howe he should spare so many men from the seige, 
havinge scarce sufficient in all to make good his seige ; wherfore if he take 
that course to beseige other places, I rather conceave he will continew his 
seige for a color, and so block Roan then batter it att all, if he so proceed. 
I feare his desire to imploye our English in the takinge in of these places ; 
wherfore I crave to knowe your Lordships opinion and her Majesties pleasure 
therin, for without farder direction he shall comande none of them to those 
services, I haveing heretofore receaved soche comandement. I cannot assure 
your Lordship of this the Kinges resolution, but many very neare aboute him 
do acquaint me with thus much ; wherof I thought necessarie to give your 
Lordship to understand, fearing the worst. 

The Duke of Parmas staie doth greately amuse the King and crosse his 
resolutions, and his French horse doe daiely disband ; his owne counsell 
are so devided amonst themselves in this matter of Roan, as the Kinge 
is amased and verie resolute, they torment hym greately ; wherfore what to 
advertise certenly I know not. 

The treaty of peace is prosecuted, but La Chastre is refused by the Kinge 
to be a dealler therin ; and Grammonte is daiely expected, who is very 
insufficient to manage so greate a matter, but to make the overture and 
to reconcile some particularities betweene the Kinge and Monsr. De Mayne. 
Villeroy is also expected who hath a pasport from the Kinge, and with him 



A, D. 1592.] 369 

Delbeiif ; and Bassampierre, who is pensionary to Spaine, challengeth a 
greate debt of the last Kinge. This is a baite to abuse the poore Kinge, 
and to make the Leagures more acceptable to the Kinge of Spaine, if it suc- 
ceed not, wherfore they will make a double profitt of this treaty of peace. 

Others advertise very credibley that the Duke de Mayne hath g^ven his oath 
of fidelety to the Infante of Spaine and the Duke of Guise Ukewise, and that 
they wiU acknowledge her to be their soveraigne. The Duke D'Aumale did 
the like before them, and 8 or 9 others ; they advertise also, that of the 
French many of them doe hereuppon intende to forsake the League ; this 
newes and the treaty of peace are so directly opposite as they urge noe 
greate beleife, wherfore I doe but report them as I receave them. 

Monsr. De BouUon is made Marshall of Fraunce, wherat the Leagures 
storme greately, accusinge the Kinge of breach of his promise and former 
protestation, and takinge greate exceptions to him for the same ; he doth little 
regard it, and saieth he will either be a whole Kinge or none att all. 

The Queen Elizabeth, Dowager of Fraunce, her deth doth increase the 
Kinges revennewes a 100,000 crowns. Duke Chassymire his death is no- 
thinge lamented, because it is nowe more maniefestly discovered by his 
writing of his being pensionary to the Kinge of Spaine ; but many greeve 
for the death of the Duke of Wertemberge, wherof some do yett make 
doubt. 

The Marshall Biron seueth to be leiutenant of Normandy under the Duke 
Montpensier, whose insufficiency doth discover all things ther, the Marshall 
D'Aumont also would have that place ; the other is hke to prevaile, and 
is very willinge to end his dales in Normandy, especially if Roan be taken. 

Our Reytters are not yett payed, and the Prince D'Anhalt required me to 
deale earnestly with the Kinge for ther better satisfacttion, who hath therup- 
pon payed them some parte, but farr from ther dewe, wherwith they are 
contented. The Kinge promisseth to satisfie them better very shortely. The 
Prince D'Anhalt desireth her Majesties remembrance to the Kinge in 
ther behalfe, which he doth finde dothe very much good. I am weary 
of the trouble I have hadd with them, yett hathe my service therin done the 
Kinge much good. 

An Englishe captaine of Lyn consortinge with a French man of this towne, 
they beinge bothe men of warr, are retourned with a very greate prise to the 
valewe of 20,000 crownes, in sugger and Brazill, taken uppon the coaste 

B B B 



370 [March, 

of Spaine. They bringe newes of the greate preparation of Spaine for 
Fraunce, and that 50 shipes retourninge out of the Indies are cast away, and 
that out of the Portuggall Indies no shipes are retoumed ; they have brought 
ther prise into this towne. 

Outt of Ittalie the deth of Aldobrandino is confirmed, who lived but 9 
daies Pope, and was poysoned by the Kinge of Spaine ; also the death of the 
Duke of Ferrara is advertised, and that the Emperor maketh title to 
Reggio and Modona, and the Venetians to Este ; which is thought will breed 
troubles in Italie and cause dissention betweene the next Pope and them. 
Of these Italy occurrences, I doubt not but your Lordship is better and sooner 
advertised, by the way of Germany, then we can be here, in respect of the 
danger of passage and the dailie miscarringe of our letters ; wherfore I doe 
but touch them by peice mele, and conclude with the newes of the Emperors 
greate preparation to resist the Turke in Hungarie this next yeare. 

Havinge nothinge else, I most humbly take my leave. 

From Deipe, this 9th » of Marche, 1591. 

Your Lordship's to command, 

Henry Unton. 



CXCV. 

1592, 

9 Mar. " To the lord Admirall ; by Charles Jaspar. " 2 

Right honorable, my very good Lord. By a letter sent from my Secretary 
Edmons, I perceave howe much your Lordship favoreth the comon cause 
and furthereth the good therof, which I have made knowen imto this poore 
Kinge, ^ who sendeth your Lordship this inclosed of his owne hande writinge 
to testifie his thanckfullnes, which he also requireth me to expresse, and 

' In the Cottonian transcript this letter is dated the 10th of March. 
' A copy of this letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E viii. fol. 280. 
' Here is the beginning of the Cottonian copy. 



A. D. 1592,] 371 

to assure your Lordship of his beste meanes in requitall ; in the meane tyme 
he speaketh all honor of you, and taketh these your Lordships favors most 
kindely. 

I understand also howe much I am bound to your Lordship for your 
Honors good opinion conceaved of me, and your moste noble speeches given 
often to her Majestic in my behalfe, which have wrought a good impression 
in her Highenesse conceit of me. These are the highest favors I can receave 
in this world ; for the which I will ever trewly honor and serve your Lord- 
ship. Yt pleased your Lordship to offer me your favor before my departure, 
the performance wherof I nowe feele to my singular comforte ; and if your 
Lordship vouchesafe the continewance therof, yt will encrease my obligation ; 
in lewe wherof I can but give your Lordship all power to dispose of me 
and my best fortune, and shalbe ever at your commandement and yours. 

My error in not writinge to your Lordship to entertaine your good favors 
I must confesse, and crave pardon accordingly; yf your Lordship did 
knowe the streight commandments I receave for not writinge, and howe much 
I have ben subject to the jelousy of some, which have done me greate hurte, 
my hope is you would excuse my not writinge. I doe nowe ly open to the 
mallice of the world sence the death of my Lord Chancelor, wherwith I 
am daily bitten. If I may taste of your favor I shall feare the lesse, and 
shall account myselfe happy therin. I can challenge nothinge of your 
Lordship by merritt, and what I receave is of your Lordships mere good- 
nesse. My deads shall one day better expresse my thanckfullnes then 
words. In the meane season I crave the continewance of your Honors 
conceipt of me. 

The Kinge is marched to the seige of Roan with his Dutch forces sent out 
of the Lowe Contreis to his ayde ; he hath comanded me to attend 
here the cominge of the Englishe and to hasten to him. He seemeth resolute 
to batter the towne, and hopeth of good successe if the Duke of Parma 
hinder it not by his retourne, who staieth as yet aboute, with out beseiginge 
it • intendinge, as we thincke, to refreshe his army and to entertaine tyme to 
weary us out, and to retourne when Roan is more pressed. He seaketh 
to prevaile more by pollicie then force ; and escheweth fight, but in ex- 
tremities. His army is well paied, and the Kings army is bothe harried and 
unpaied, sufferinge all manner of wants. The best is, the cause is good, and 
God the protector of his right ; and we trust nothinge to our meanes, beinge 



372 [MarcHj 

weake, but to miracles. Great speech is of a peace which is nowe in treaty, 
but no hope. God directe all for the best. 

I leave further to trouble your Lordship, and so moste humbly take 
my leave, restinge wholly, 

At your Honors commandement, 

Henry Unton. 

Diepe, this 9th of March, 1591. 



CXCVI. 

1592, 

9 Mar. " From the Earle of Essex ; receaved the 19th, 

by Sir Mathewe Morgaine. " &gt; 

My very good Lord. If your Lordship hath not hard from me ^ this last 
weeke, thincke it not wante of kindnesse or of watchfullnesse to take occasion 
to gett the Queene to revoke you; but it was my absence from the court 
which hindered my not speakinge, and another accident which made me 
thincke I should doe noe good to write. I am nowe come to the courte, and 
will earnestly soUicite yt. I doe assure your Lordship if I had not bene unfitt 
to speake, I would have effected it ere this, but the cause I must not write ; 
your Lordship may guesse it. 

I doe much doubte of the good successe against Roan nowe the succors be 
entred. I doe wishe myselfe with him, for I vow to God I hadd rather 
venture every day to breake my necke with him, then live so idle a liefe as I 
doe ; and I shall not thincke that the brave Duke of Bouillon is in danger 
but I shall wishe myselfe with him. Your Lordship shall heare very shortely 
from me againe. Soe for this tyme I comend your Lordship to Gods best 
protection. 

' The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 161. 
' Here commences the Cottonian original. 



A. D. 1592.] 373 

The Court, this 9th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships most assured, 

Robert Essex. 
To my honorable freind. Sir Henry 
Unton, Ambassador for her Majestic 
with the French Kinge. 



CXCVII. 
1592, 

10 Mar. " To my honorable frend, Sir Harry Umpton, Knight, her 
Majesties Imbasador in Frauns. " ' 



you for your paines and travel in the .... 

and sending of thes thinges of my soon 

had remaining ; you ar and shalbe ever 

that in all thinges to my power I will 

this your loving kindnes with true fren 

and good wiU towardes you againe. 

I wrote also unto you toching the h [orse] 
furniture which you retaine with you 
was my soons. If Mr. Grose charge .... 
which I do yet owe for my said soon 
not exceding grete, I wold willingly .... 
left him to you had he ben much .... 
but now having occacion to make ot . . . . 
to Mr. Otwell Smith, I do pray you 

unto him you wil make paiment 

some of iiij."""* the which some he cost 

in England, and was sold to me 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 177. 



374 [March, 

dere frend that assured me Mr. Gr 

«•"■ in the price. Besides I am a 

that my soon William was oflred for 

in Frauns at on time ccc crownes, and .... ... 

an other iiiy"- Crownes ; and in truth 

is an exceeding good horse. Toching y 

return I have and wil endeavour to procu 

the same to my uttermost, and so wishing 

al happy succes to the negotiation now [in] 

hand I end, this 10 of March, 1591. 

Your very loving and assured frend, 

T. BUCKEHURST. 



CXCVIII. 



1592, 

14 Mar. " From Sir Robert Cecill ; receaved the 24th, by 

Edmonds. " 

Sir, this bearrer can certefie you of all our occurences, and for myseMe I ■will 
only by reason of Mr. Wilks negotiation, leave aU to his relation. My lord of 
Essex hath very honorably and earnestly delt for your revocation ; the Queene 
did somewhat distaste it at first ; but in the end, by His Lordships effectuall 
mediation, her Majestie is pleased to have you knowe by me, that so soone as 
she is a little more assured of the successe of this present action in Norman- 
die, which she shall finde by Mr. Wilks his report, she will take order for your 
retoume ; which nowe on the suddaine were bothe preposterous and daunger- 
ous, when the enemy should finde on the soddaine her Ambassador revoked. 

More then my love I cannot oflFer you, nor more can I promise you then the 
best of my power to doe you all pleasure I may. 

And so wishinge you by thancks to apprehend my Lord of Essex his favor 
herin, I take my leave. 



A. D. 1592.] 375 

From the Courte, this 14th of March, 1591. 



Your very lovinge fireind att 
comandement. 



Robert Cecill. 



CXCIX. 

1592, 

14 Mar. •* From the Earle of Essex ; receaved the 24th, by 

Edmonds. " &gt; 

My verie good Lord. I hadd once gotten an absolute graunte of your leave 
to come home, which the Queene ^ tould me Mr. Wilkes should carrie, but 
the next day I found her cleane altered ; and she had newe arguments, as the 
danger might growe to the cause by her sendinge for her Ambassador, and the 
inconveniences which might come if Roan should be taken, and her Ambas- 
sador not there to urge the Kinge to keepe all covenants with the Queene. 

To conclude, her resolute answer was, that if the towne were taken, or the 
seige levied, then you should come home ; and in the meane tyme she woulde 
heare Mr. Wilkes his relation of the state of things there. I perswade myselfe 
your Lordship, if Mr. Wilkes be your freind, may serve yourselfe by that 
occasion. I have [I] protest done what I can, and so I will doe all wayes. 

I vrish to your Lordship as to myselfe and rest. 

Your moste assured freind, 

Robert Essex. 

' The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig E. viii. fol. 163. 
' Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



376 [March, 



CC. 

1592, 

14 Mar. " From the lord Threasurer ; receaved the 24th, by 

Mr. Wilkes."! 

My Lord, I am farr behinde hand in acquitall of your late nomber of let- 
ters, by reason of my infirmitie, wherwith I have bene longe detained, and not 
yett recovered ; but 1 did never neglect the impartinge of ^ all your letters to 
her Majestic in due season, sendinge them to her Majestic by my sonne Sir 
Robert Cecill, who, as I understand, did alwaics read and imparte the same unto 
her Majestic ; and as I thinke, sometymes by her Majesties commandement 
he hath advertised you of her opinion touchinge some partes therof. And 
nowe at this present her Majestic, havinge consideration of the backwardncsse 
of this matter of Roan and of the expence of treasure and wastinge of her peo- 
ple there to no soch purpose as was first intended, and of the like eviU successe 
of her forces in Bryttany, wher also her people have ben wasted without pur- 
pose, findinge it doubtfull what resolution to make, without some serious con- 
ference with the Kinge ther ; — she hathe thought best to send some speciall ser- 
vant of hers well instructed, which is Mr. Wilkes the bearrer hereof, one of the 
Clarkes of her Privy Counsellors, which, because he is comanded to impart 
unto you, I forbeare to expresse in any particularities, not dowtinge but you and 
he together, after conference hadd, will so direct yourselves to attaine to the 
trewth of the Kings meaninge, and moste likelihood of successe in their actions 
both for Normandie and Brittaigne, as at his retourne her Majestie shall with 
more facillitie enter into some resolutions then at this time she can doe ; beinge 
sorry to see soch backward success of that Kinges affaires as her Majestie is 
nowe forced to enter into newe consultations which in reason ought to proceed 
all actions in tyme, and not to begin at the end. But ita sunt res kumance, 
that wee cannot promise any event before it fall. I assure you the realme here 
is weary to see the expence of their people for foreine services, havinge present- 
ly in sight great necessitie of domestiall forces to withstand forreine attemptes 

' The original letter is contained in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 18. 
^ Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 377 

daily prepared againste this realme ; but therof I am assured no French man 
will be touched with any sence. 

And so havinge no other speciall matter at this tyme, I wishe some better 
successe to foUowe the affairs ther, and some better performance of promises ; 
and (that which is moste necessarie for that estate,) some better agreement of 
the counsellors of the Kinges estate for his speciall good, more then dothe 
appere. 

From the Cort, this 14th » of March, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freind, 



To the right honorable my very 
good freind Sir Henry Unton, 
Knight, her Majesties Ambassa- 
dor in Fraunce. 



W. BURGLEY. 



CCl. 

1592. 

15 Mar. " From the lord Admirall; receaved the 24th, by 

Edmonds. " 2 

Sir, I have ' receaved a letter from you, and a letter inclosed from the Kinges 
Majestic. I perceive by the Kinges letter that it hath pleased you to informe 
the Kinge of my dewtifiill and affectionate service to him ; I am to give you 
very harte thancks for it, as also moste especially for your owne construction 
of my good will and love to yourselfe, which I doe assure you as I did promise 
att your departure, so have I performed it, and will to my power in any thinge 
that shall conceme you. You have and doe daily give me and other your 
freinds very sufficient cause by your good, carefull and daungerous service to 
her Majestic to use in your absence that which is fitt for us to doe. 

' In the Cottonian MS. this letter is dated the xiij. 

' The original copy of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 513. 

3 Here is the beg:inniog of the Cottonian letter. 

c c c 



378 [March, 

Sir, I pray you to prosecute my assured and most affectioned service with 
most humble thancks for his Majesties most gracious and favorable letter unto 
me ; and to assure his Majestic that I will not omitt any occasion that shall ly 
in me to forward any of his services, and that I am very sorry that in myne 
owne person I have not power of it, to present it unto his service that I could 
wishe ; but good wiU and my dewtifuU affection to any cause that shall concerne 
his Majestie shall not sleepe. 

Sir, for your owne particular, as I knowe and you feele the great losse of your 
honorable freind, and that I cannot compare in power and creditt to stand you 
in that stede of freindshipp which he did, and would have done, if God had 
spared him life ; yett this I may bouldly and assuredly promise you, and will 
performe to my power, all love and good will to you, as much as any hath or 
shall ; and I pray you use it, for I wiU not faile you. 

I am called away in hast to her Majestie ; I hadd els written somethinge of 
my opinion at large conceminge the greate and comon cause, as a thinge that 
we are greatly ingaged in. And I count the Kinge and our Queene imbarqued 
in one vessel, and ther fortune to rune on [one] pointe of the compas ; but 
tyme will not permitt me, and therfore I breake of till an other time. Till 
then I recomend my affectionate love to you, and bidd you most hartely 
farewell. 

The Courte, the 15th of Ma. 1591, 

Your assured and affectionate 
freind to use. 

You are much beholdinge to Sir C. Howarde. 

Robert Cecill for his love and 
freindship to you. 



ecu. 

1592, 

15 Mar. " From the Lord Chamberline; receaved the 24th, by 

Edmonds.'-' i 



After 



my harty comendations. Havinge so convenient a messenger as this 



" The original letter is preserved in the same MS. fol. 171. 



A. D. 1592.] 379 

' bearrer, by whom I receaved a letter of the present state of things ther, for 
which, as also for many other of your letters sence your goinge over, I am to 
give you most harty thancks. I could therfore doe no lesse then salute you 
with theise fewe lines; and albeit I knowe you shall perfectly understand her 
Majesties resolution, both for the present aydinge of the French Kinge and for 
the disposinge of matters in Brittaigne, 1 cannot but certifie you therof, for that 
her Majestie is presently sendinge over Mr. WUkes, the Clarke of the Counsell, 
aboute these causes. And so not wilUnge to trouble you over longe, and de- 
sirous to heare from you as accidents fall out, I rest most wiUinge to doe you any 
good office I may, as you shall assuredly finde when occasion shalbe offered 
wherin I may stande you in steed. And even so byd you hartely farewell. 
White Hall, this 15th of March, 1591. 

Your very lovinge freind, 

HUNSDON. 

To the right honorable Sir 
Henry Unton, Knight, lord 
Ambassador for her Majestie 
with the French Kinge. 



ccni. 

1592, 

15 Mar. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Hugh Tomer. " « 

Yt may please your Lordship to understand that uppon Sonday laste 
the Kinge and his counsell did fully conclude and take resolution to batter 
Roan. Nothinge was lefte undone by his Catholicques that was thought fitt 
to hinder that ^ resolution, and they did ever hould with the difficulties. That 
matter hath had as many varieties as houres of conference, wherof if I had 
from tyme to tyme advertised your Lordship, yt would have seemed most 

' Here is the beginning of the Cottonian copy. 
The original letter is in the State Paper Office, a contemporaneous copy in the volume so frequently 
quoted, fol. 281. 
' Here begins the Cottonian transcript. 



380 [March, 

strange. God give them better mindes and more grace of circumspection. 
The Kinge dothe nowe only attende the cominge of the Englishe, and 
then will imediatly begine his aproches ; before he cannot. The good suc- 
cesse must come from God, Who is the God of hope, and it is His gifte 
if men doe forsee and prevent mischeefes to come. Our former errors in this 
seige we hope nowe to amend, and our late freshe experience must needs 
teach us a better lesson. Our former irresolutions and Ul resolutions have only 
occasioned our former mischeifes, wherwith we have rested to much amazed 
as we could never thincke upon the remidies in tyme. My late feare 
signified by my laste letters wiU nowe I hope prove vaine, and I hould it to 
be lesse danger to feare to much then to httell, especially havinge any 
good ground therof. I cannot but thincke reverently and moste honorably 
of the Kinge, whose constant resolution hath only gained the rest, and 
■was the rather inclined there unto to give her Majestic contentement, which 
doth moste discontent his Catholicques. I vnshe I had cause to believe 
of them as of him. God direct all for the beste. 

The Kinge hathe nowe an enterprise in hand uppon Roan, which groweth by 
intelligence, wherof good hope is conceaved, if soddenesse and secrecie be used 
therin, and the execution sta,ndeth uppon many adventures, the more in 
respecte of Villars cunninge and vigilancie. But he hath so lately and 
tyrannously distasted the burgesses with his stratageme to ransome many of 
them of purpose to inrich himselfe, as he may be nowe repaied ; which God 
graunt. 

They of the towne doe labor continually to repaire upp the wall so 
miraculosly fallen downe ; they want freshe victuall very much and have no 
greate plenty of salt victuall, which causeth the souldiers to thrust out daiely 
many prentisses out of the towne, to the offence of the burgesses. The late 
supplie that entred to the succor of the towne were very poore creatures, and 
did bring with them a kinde of flyxe verie infective, wherof many in the 
towne doe daily die ; that infection reigneth greately in the Duke of Parmas 
campe. 

The treatie of peace will I thincke prove a dreame, and was but projected 
to coUor the delay of this greate action of Roan, and to lull the Kinge 
asleepe ; yet is Grammont daily expected, who cometh rather as it is nowe 
thought to make his owne particular peace with the Kinge and to forsake the 
Leage(as many others pretend) in respect that the Dukes de Mayne and 



A. D. 1592.] 381 

of Guise doe become wholly Spanishe and professed servants to the Infante of 
Spaine, whom they meane to acknowledge for ther soveraigne, accordinge to 
the last advertisement which proveth nowe very probable, and so I am 
credebly advertised from the Duke of Parmas campe, which hathe bene the 
specialle cause of his stay and cominge into Fraunce. Yt is credebly advertised 
the matter is agreed and will shortely apparently burst out. The Duke 
of Guise is drawen into the action with hope to marry her ; and that to gaine 
her good will he must shewe himselfe very forward and resolute for her and 
the cause. Great offers and faire promisses are made unto them and 
increase of pensions. The Duke De Mayne hadd before 12,000 crownes 
pensione a moneth, and the Duke of Guise 8,000 crownes ; and the 70,000 
crownes monethely allowance for the maintenance of the warres, wherof the 
Duke De Mayne had before the disbursinge, is nowe disposed by the Duke of 
Parmas discretion, of purpose to make his followers to depend imediatly 
upon the Kinge of Spaine and to imploy the same more profitable for his 
master ; wherwith the Duke De Mayne was at the first muche discontented, 
but nowe he hath soch large offers made as he expecteth greater matters. 

Mony maketh them doe any thinge, and ther ambition to rule ; and 
they will serve their tournes of the Kinge of Spaines treasure and ayde, and 
he will make his profitt therof and of ther gredinesse ; and by bridlinge 
Fraunce he thincketh to bridle all Christendome, wherin God may suffer 
mans wisdome to prevaile for a tyme, aUwaies He will not ; and His will be 
done with mercy. 

The duke of Parma treateth also with the Duke De Mayne for the present 
delivery of all the maritine townes and places of account by the sea coste in 
Fraunce which the League possesseth, into the Kinge of Spaines handes, and 
that they may receave Spanishe garison into them. This is very earnestly 
pressed, and in a manner accorded by the Duke De Mayne ; thoughe it be in 
his will, yett I hope it shall not be in his power to bringe to passe. This 
footinge-place the Kinge of Spaine desireth in respect of Fraunce and 
Englande ; but God I hope will remove him furder, and confound his 
devises, and preserve England still for a sanctuary and refuge for the godley. 
This I can assure your Lordship is fallen into treatie betwixt the Duke of 
Parma and the Duke De Mayne very lately, and almoste accorded ; and they 
seeke as yett to have it passe in silence, but time will shortely discover, 
and God and her Majestic will in time I doubt not prevent it. The plat is 



382 [March, 

dangerous bothe for Frauiice and England, and carrieth some possibilitie with 
it ; and the Kinge of Spaines riches and greatnesse waighed with the French 
Kinges povertie and weaknesse, it cannot but ingender feare and nourishe 
many doubtes in us. We must onely have recourse by praier to God's 
goodnesse and defence. Who hathe hertofore and hetherto protected this 
Kinge and his contrey miracously. 

The Kinge is advertised that the Duke of Parma hath raised his seege att 
Rue and intendeth to retire into the Lowe Contries, expectinge monney 
to paie his forces, and then to putt them into garison in the frontires of 
Fraunce and of the Lowe Contries. I am otherwise advertised from his 
campe very lately, and that he was not risen from thence, and intended to 
prosecute his seige ther and very shortly to batter it; and yesterday one came 
■from thence who saieth yt is not yett levied, which is the moste probable. 
He useth all meanes to diverte the watere courses about Rue an other way ; 
and the contrey beinge flat, he is forced to raise a cavalyer of purpose to batter 
the towne. In the carriage of his cannon to the place he mired three of 
them, so as he had much to doe to recover them. 

They of Rue have noe want of men and munition, and reasonable store of 
victuall; other companies were lately sent from hence to enter the towne. 
The Duke of Parma in making of his approches hath loste diverse men, both 
with great shott from the towne and in salleyes made upon them by them 
of the towne ; and it is expected that the Duke of Guieses horse was shott 
under him with a cannon. It was offered by the Duke of Parma to the 
Governor of Rue, that if the towne would accorde to newtrallitie that he 
would quit his seige, which was utterly refused. Yt is the enemies polhcy to 
perswade all weake townes to a newtrallity, that therby the greate townes may 
be the better furnished with victuall from them, which they want; for 
the newter townes trafficke freely with Deip, and aU other places that hould 
for the Kinge, and so convey all things to the enemy ; which the Kinge nowe 
perceavinge, will suffer noe more newtralities. They of Newfchastell offer 
likewise a newtrallity by the enemies desire, because the towne is so weake as 
it cannott defend itselfe ; but the Kinge refuseth to accord to their request. 

The Duke of Parma his Lorraines are all disbanded, his French long since, 
and moste parte of his Wallons, who retourned without pasport assone as 
they were passed the river of Some ; so that his forces are very greately 
weakned therby, and his army much harried. They of Roan doe eamestley 



A. D.I 592.] 383 

sollicite the Duke of Parmas retourne ; but to doe them any good and with 
his owne safety, without a newe supply of men out of the Lowe Countries he 
cannott. They pretend Roan is otherwise lost, for that they wante munition 
and victuall bothe for men and horse, and they cannott in three monethes 
repaire so much of the walles of the towne as is fallen downe; this is the 
advertisement to the Duke of Parma. 

Many bruites are raised of the count Soissons, for that after he had visited 
his mother he passed over the river of Loyre, whether none can teU ; they 
have noe grownd of this suspition, for that the Kinge never used him better 
then of late, and himselfe before his departure confessed to mee that he 
never found soe much grace at the Kings hands as then, for the which he 
required me to render his humble thanckes to her Majestic, by whose 
recomendations he saied he receaved the more favor. It will therfore I hope' 
prove but a bruite. 

Thus leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, expectinge howerly the 
cominge of her Majesties forces, I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Diep, this 15th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships ever to command, 

Henry Unton. 
This is the seaventh pacquet I have sente 

to your Lordship. I have had no answer of 

ther receipt, and longe very much to here 

from your Lordship, because we have here 

many strange bruits, and amonst the rest that 

Porchmouth should have bene betrayed to the 

Spaniard and her Majesties shippes burned ; 

which God defend. 



CCIV. 
1592, 
15 Mar. " To Sir Thomas Hennage ; by Hughe Turner. " i 

Howe much I am bound to your Honor for your many favors 1 doe not only 
■ A draft of this letter is contained in the MS. already cited, fol. 287. 



384 [March, 

perceave by your owne letters but by the advertisements of my freindes out 
of England, for the which I cannot but honor and serve your Honer, bothe 
which I will ever performe duringe life, and doe wishe my service ^ may yeald 
some dewe testimony of my thanckfull mynde. It is strange to me that 
my service should be acceptable to her Majestie, as it pleaseth your Honor to 
assure me by your last letter of the 27th of Februarie, consideringe the malice 
and envy of some who doe secretly bite me and disgrace bothe me and 
my service, wrestinge my letters and detractinge from me all they may ; 
notwithstandinge, by your Honors good meanes and her Majesties gratious 
favor, I doe understand they doe not prevaile againste me, albeit ther 
practices want not to the uttmost. I protest I did never give any man juste 
cause of offence against mee, and what is done is handled underhande ; they 
shall have noe advantage of my actions, althoughe they have greate of my 
absence ; and my service in this place shall manifeste my obedience unto her 
Majesties pleasure and my diligence and dewtifull desire to serve her 
Highnesse, which is, and ever shalbe, my onley care. I am bould to com- 
plaine to your Honor, whose favor I doubt not but will protect mee ; and I 
cast the greatest parte of my care uppon your Honor in respect of your 
Honors offer and goodnesse. 

That your Honor had no letters lately from me was the want of trustie 
messengers, accordinge to your former direction. I am glad of this occasion 
by your servant ; and by your other, John Muschy, I intend also to write. I 
dare not trust others, and the messengers are yeamestly sifted to knowe what 
letters they have from me ; wherfore I am the more sparinge in my letters, 
for the which I crave your promised pardon. 

The late offer of a treatie of peace will prove nothinge, and I thinck wiU not 
at all prove to a treatie ; yf they doe, the first point of ther demand for 
the Kinge to become a Catholicque will make a breche of the whole. The 
Leaguers did but profer it to amuse the Kinge, to distaste his Catholicques, 
and to better ther condition with Spaine, which they nowe treate with mighte 
and mayne, resolvinge to become wholly Spanishe and to promise allowance 
to the Infante of Spaine as to ther soveraigne. They drawe the Duke of 
Guise into the action upon hope to marry her, which will prove vaine. Many 
of the French Leaguers doe not applaud that course to hovdd with Spaine, and 
doe theruppon intend to retire themselves. The Kinge of Spaines pensions 
and perswasions will prevaile much with the Frenche, who will make ther 

' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



A. D. 1592.J 385 

profitt of his men and money, and he his owne, moste of ther gredinesse and 
corruption. 

The Dake of Parma laboreth with the Duke De Mayne to possesse the 
Kinge of Spaine with all the maritine townes and places of strength in 
Fraunce, which is in a manner accorded betweene them ; but I hope it be not 
in their powers to bringe to passe. Yt would prove otherwise dangerous 
both for Fraunce and England, wherunto they tend. God I hope will remove 
them furder of. 

The Kinge hath nowe resolved constantly to batter Roan with all expedi- 
tion, wherin the Catholicques of his counsell have mightely opposed themselves 
against it ; but nowe it is fully concluded, and they beginne to come with 
ther trenches nere unto the townes, so that with in a moneth we hope 
to make a faire breach. They have greate wante of victualls in the towne, 
and of munition, and will not be able in 3 monethes to repaire the walles 
fallen downe. 

Of the Duke of Parmas seige before Rue we have contrary advertisements, 
but the most credible is that the seige is not raised and continueth, and 
he indevoreth to drie upp the waters, and to diverte them an other way, which 
he may in tyme easely performe. He maketh his aproches, and they of the 
towne sally out dailie and repulse them. 

The Duke of Parmas army is very much harried out, and his Lorraines 
all retourned and moste parte of the Wallons, so that his forces be very 
much weakened, and this seege wUl weaken them more. He hath a very 
greate flix in is army, which is very infective, and wherof many die daUie. 

I leave furder to trouble your Honor, knowinge you are better informed of 
all things that passe here, by others. And soe I moste humblie take my 
leave. 

Diepp, 15th. of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 



D D D 



386 [March, 



ccv. 

1592, 

15 Mar. To Sir Robert Cecill ; by Hughe Torner. " i 

Your Honor will I hope nowe confesse that I have over-much importuned 
you with my idle letters, and that you rather growe weary then desirous of 
them ; if I may knowe so much from your Honor I wilbe more sparinge and ^ 
lesse troublesome, untill then I will continewe my former course of writinge, 
beinge the only meane I have to expresse my devotion and thanckfvdl- 
nesse for your manie honorable favors, wherof I daily receave comfort and 
advertisement from my freinds, and lately by my Secretarie Edmonds, who 
hath certefied me therof at large. I humblie beseech you to assure yourselfe 
of my thanckfuUnesse and ever service ; an^ you have full power to dispose of 
mee and my poore fortune in requitall, acknowledginge myselfe more yours 
then any mans in England. 

My hope is you vouchsafe to keepe me in the favor of my noble Lord your 
father, who dothe daily increase his favors towards me ; I can but honor and 
serve him, and pray for his life, for the good of the publicke and my owne 
particular. I dare not in my letters mingle idle ceremonies with matters of 
advertisements, and I am therfore bould to crave the use of your Honors 
favor in that behalfe, wherof I doe presume. 

By my letters to his Lordship, your Honor may perceave the overthwart 
proceedinges of the Kinges rebells and the Kinge of Spaines develishe prac- 
tises against this state; the poore Kinge must be miraculously defended 
by God, or else he cannott longe subsist. He wanteth meanes and hath neede 
of miracles, and without her Majesties uphhouldinge would quickly perishe • 
shee only giveth life to his actions and terror to his enemies. 

I attend here her Majesties newe forces by the Kinges commandement 
to hasten them to Roan, and we never had so good hope of Roan as nowe for 
they beginne to suffer the miseries of our longe seige. 

1 A copy of this letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 280. The original is in the State 
Paper Office. 

' Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



A. D, 1592.] 387 

My revocation, (which I understand by my Lord of Essex her Majestic is 
pleased to graunt uppon the ende of this action,) I beseech your Honor 
to furder, accordinge to my former sute to you in that behalfe; if I 
may retourne with her Majesties favors, I shall hould myselfe a most happie 
man, and will then pray for her in the countrey and take some comforte of my 
life after my many misseries. I knowe I shall need to sollicite your Honor, 
who knoweth best howe and when to remember her ; wherfore I humbly take 
my leave, and longe to have a letter from your Honor ■n-ith some good newes 
touchinge my revocation. 

From Diepe, this 15th of March, 1591. 

Your Honors unfainedly to comande, 

Henry Unton. 



CCVI. 

1592, 

16 Mar. " From her Majestic ; receaved the 24th, 

by Mr. Wilkes. " ' 
ELIZABETH R. 

Trustie and well-beloved, we greete you well. Wee have presently sent this 
gentleman, oiu" trusty servant, Thomas Wilkes, one of the clarkes of our 
Privie Counsell, to our good brother the French Kinge, with charge of certaine 
speciall matters comitted unto him conceminge our service, which we have 
willed Wilkes also to comunicate unto you. And albeit wee have somewhat 
misliked of your forwardnesse in soUicitinge of matters on the Kinges behalfe 
towards us heretofore, yet we consider that the same hathe proceeded in you of 
an earnestenes to our service and good, and do for the same very well allowe 
of your good meaninge, our good acceptation wherof we would not but 
lett you knowe, with that good opinion and likinge towards you that you have 

&gt; The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. already quoted, fol. 229. A copy is preserved in the 
State Paper Office. 



388 [March, 

deserved, and which you shall finde we will retaine in our gratious memorie 
towards you. 

And for your retourne hether, as we are content to assent thereunto, so )'et 
we cannot send you our full resolution of the tyme for the same untill the re- 
tourne of our servant Wilkes unto us againe. 

Given under our signet, att our Pallace of Westminster, the 16th of March, 
1591, in the 34th of our raigne. 

To our trusty and welbeloved Sir 
Henry Unton, Knight, our Ambas- 
sador resident with our good brother 
the French Kinge. 



CCVII. 

1592, 

1 7 Mar. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Mr Marhn. " ' 

My very good Lord ; by my former letters of the 13th and 23rd of Februarj 
I did advertise your Lordship what order the Kinge had given for the victual 
inge of her Majesties pinasses, and what they had receaved bothe in money 
and victuaU ; I did also deliver howe much ther departure ^ would prejudice 
the seige at Roan, and howe necessary their staie was for the furderance therof, 
and the Kinges earnest request in that behalfe ; wherof I craved your Lord- 
ships answer and present direction, but as yett I have heard nothinge therof 
from your Lordship. They which have the charge of the pinnasses doe com- 
plaine of want of victualls, and that they have had none thes seaven dales ; 
and they feare the Kinge is not able to furnishe them with victuall, in respect 
the countrey is so harried and spoiled, and nowe very unable to yeald it ; 
which I confesse they have reason to feare, for all things growe to excessive 
prises and an extreame dearth ; the people of the contry dyinge daylie of 

^ The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; and a copy in the voiiirne already quoted, fol. 
383. 

Here is the beginning of the Cottonian transcript. 



A. D. 1592.] 389 

famine, insomuchas 4,000 are sayed to be dead therof within this moneth, and 
all things must of necessitie shortely growe to extreme scarcely in these parts 
wher the two greate armies have eaten upp all. Wherfore they that have 
charge of the pinnasses doe desier they may retoume, or be in tyme provided 
for. I doubt not but the Kinge will pay them money, as he hath doen, but to 
victuall them here is almoste impossible, and they were heretofore rather con- 
tented to accept money then victuaUs. If I were at the campe I might pro- 
cure money for them, and I have earnestly written to the Kinge this day 
urginge his better regard of them ; wherof heretofore they often complained 
Avithout cause. 

The letter signifyinge their complaint I receaved yesterday, which I send 
to your Lordship here inclosed ^ ; this bearrer also they send, by whom I 
thought good to write to your Lordship to crave your fiirder directions in that 
behalfe, beinge sorry to see ther wants, and not knowinge howe they may be 
supplied for victuall but from England; and hopinge to obtaine money 
for them of the Kinge att my cominge to him, which shalbe with in 3 or 4 
dales ; for if her Majesties forces come not hether in the meane tyme, I 
thincke it necessarie to attende the Kinge for this and other special! causes. 

Yf the pinnasses retoume, the whole action of Roan is overthrowen, for the 
Hollanders will not stale after them, and then any succors may passe alonge 
the river and enter the towne ; which I leave to your Lordships better consi- 
deration. 

This dale I have receaved advertisement from Gravely n by Adams, whom 
I did lately send to the enemies campe, (and did take that in his way thether) 
that the Duke of Parma retourneth into the Lowe Contries, and will 
either give over the seige of Rue, or leave some troupes with the Duke 
De Mayne to continewe the seige. We doubte the contrary, but soch is his 
advertisement, and that the Duke of Parma marcheth away and retournetli 
not. 

Ought of the enemies campe I am advertised that the death of the Duke of 
Florence is confirmed, who is saied to have lefte a very great treasure ; wherof, 
as also of the government of the state, his brother, who hath longe lived in 
Spaine, shall have charge. He is onley Spanishe, and duringe the minoritie of 
the Infant will dispose bothe of the state and treasure to the Kinge of 
Spaines will, which may trouble all Italy. The Duke of Florence death will 
' This inclosure lias not been preserved. 



390 [March, 

greately prejudice the Kinge, for he was well affected to him and an enemie 
to Spaine. I doubt not but your Lordship is fidly advertised of these 
occurances out of Italie, wherfor I moste humbly take my leave. 
From Diepe, this l7th of March, 1591, in haste. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henry Unton. 



CCVIIL 

1592, 

19 Mar. " To the Lord Threasurer j by old Painter. " ^ 

My verie good Lord. Sir Edmonde Yorke with 12 companies arrived here 
yesterday, who are quartered within the Polette ; we want carriages for them 
and ther ^ bagage, and therfore we have made a dispatch to the Kinge reques- 
tinge him to send cartes from the campe, or ells they cannot march this day ; we 
expect aunswer^ and the troupes shall use all possible dilligence to march to 
Roan for that the Kinge hath greate neede of them and bathe sent Monsr. 
D'Oseray hether to receave and conduct them. The Kinge hath paied some 
money to the Reitters, and hath made a newe agreement with them to pay 
them in May, wherof the Prince D'Anhalt doth advertise me, and I am very 
gladd to finde him well pleased therwith, 

Villars hath lately treated with the Governor of Caen, pretendinge that he 
hath a disposition to accord with the Kinge underhand, and giveth very faire 
words ; but it is thought he intendeth no soche thinge, and doth but project 
yt to abuse the Kinge. 

A forte is made a Uttelle above Mount St. Catherine by the Kinge that no 
victuals shall passe into the towne by water ; and many boates were sent from 
Port De L'arche to keepe and defende that part of the river that nothinge 
should passe, which did usually before. 

' The original of this letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft in the Cottonian MS. fol. 287. 
^ Here is the beginning of the draft in the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 391 

They of Roan doe daily thrust out 40 or 50 weemen and many pryntesses ; 
they want wine, and have forbidden the makinge of beere, because they should 
spend no come in drincke. They cannot hould out longer then two monethes, 
if the Kinge doe not otherwise force them by batterie to yeald, for they will 
want all manner of victualls for men and horses. 

The Duke of Mayne is not yet throughly agreed with the Duke of Parma for 
the receaving of the Infante of Spaine ; the difference is only this, that the 
French would have her married into the howse of Lorriagne, as namely to the 
Duke of Lorraigne his sonne, or the Duke of Guise ; and the Kinge of Spaine 
will not agree therunto, but marrie her in the house of Austrich for feare of the 
death of her sonne, and it is thought he meaneth to marry her to the Em- 
peror, who wilbe very willinge if she may be receaved as Queene of Fraunce. 
This onley is the difference, and they intend to make a general! assembly at 
Reymes in May to conclude that matter, which the Frenche nobilitie of the 
League do greately dislike. 

Monsr. Bassampierre doth oflFer to entertayne intelligence with the Kinge 
underhand to hinder that matter of the Infants, and so advertise the Kinge 
continually therof, which is strange, he beinge pensionarie to Spaine ; and pro- 
raiseth never to beare armes against the Kinge but with the Duke of Lorraigne 
in his owne contrey. He demandeth a great parte of the debt the last 
Kinge did owe him, and restitution of certaine goods taken from him, and to 
be permitted to live quietly att his house and to enjoy his owne ; he is a very 
politician, and may do very much good, as he hath done greate harme ; and 
the Kinge seemeth inclined to accepte his offerr. 

The fier in Xantounge (wherof the Governor is not dead but recovered) 
begineth nowe to flame ; for that it is advertised that he killeth and ransommeth 
as many as he taketh, and Monsr St. Luc and Monsr. De Lusan, Governor 
of Blaye, are suspected to be gained to his faction ; they have very often con- 
ference together and are very familiar. Monsr. St Luc doth not yett sturr, but 
Monsr. De Lusan doth in a manner openly declare himselfe against the King, 
and did lately fumishe Monsr. De Monpesat, one of the greateste Leaguers in 
those partes, with all things necessary for his joumy into Spaine, who imbar- 
ked very lately and is gone into Spaine. Yt is rather thought they hould all 
for the Spaniard then for a Tierce partie. 

Great bruits are raised of many troupes of Spaniards landed in Brittany, 
wherof I doubt not but that your Lordship is sooner and better advertised 



392 [March, 

from thence then wee. The Duke of Guise prepareth presentley to goe into 
Poictou, to joyne his forces with the Duke Mercury and to make warres in 
those parts together. 

The Duke of BouUon intendeth imediately after Easter to goe into Gascony, 
whose presence will ill be spared in this seige at Roan ; the Duke of Longue- 
ville is departed and gone into his goverment, and the Duke De Nevers ta- 
keth his leave to departe, and all the Kinges noblesse have taken ther leave and 
are retourned. The Duke Montpensier is very sicke. 

Our army at Roan is increased to the number of 2,000 French, which were 
before disbanded, and more daily retourne in hope of spoile at Roan ; nothinge 
ells could bring them thether. 

The Duke of Parma contineweth his seige at Rue and beginethe to batter it, 
he was lately resolved to leave it and to beseige BuUen, He expecteth more 
troupes out of the Lowe Contries for he is not nowe above 7,000 foote stronge ; 
the rest are disbanded and retourned. He giveth out he will retourne to raise 
our seige at Roan, but it is not probable. His Suissers are saied to be mu- 
tined and marched 3 leagues from his camp, threatninge to retourne for want 
of pay. He required ther stay for 8 dales, and assured them of satisfaction^ 
which they expect accordingly, or els he cannott keepe them longer. Thus in 
haste, leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, beinge forced to end for want 
of leisure, I most humbly take my leave. 

From Diepe, this 19th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships ever to command, 

Henry Unton. 



CCIX. 

1591, 

20 Mar. " To my Lord Buckhurst : by John Maschy. " i 



any letter but this frorae your Lordship I have 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 292. 



A. D. 1592.] 353 

heretofore to your Lordship and have inclosed them . 

Threserers pacquett, as my late honorable and 

Sir William Sackevile could have witnessed 

had longer spared him amongst us, for whose 

as sorrye as for myne owne brother, for so 

I esteeme him : I was loth to be the adver 

mishappe, and I must witnesse that he lived and 

as great honor as ever any gentleman did. I w 

renew the cause of your Lordship's greefe, but this I 

that I was in his companie at lowe charges tha 

in the execution I lost him, and I thinke his 

horse did carie him a contrarie waie frome the 

leaders did take, so that nether French nor Eng 

in his companie when he miscaried, uppon the 

I and Captain Mostine went from mann to mann 

of him, and your Lordship knoweth that in the execution 

are so seperated one frome the other, as untiU the 

wee cannot observe what is donne, but everie one . 

his leaders, which was his falte that daie, or else 

yt should be so. I wishe I had lost one of m 

to have redemed his lyfe, I was so muche bound 

And I did send a trumpet as sone as I could . 

what was become of him, before which time wee . 

hope that he had bene taken prisoner. Th . 

laments his losse very greatlie, and did love h . 

intirelie ; he is more happie then he, that bey 

behind him and I wishe my seelfe with him 

weary of this miserable world, having no ca . 

take comforte in it. 

The Lxxx " your Lordship requireth for the horse Mr. S 
is answered, who promiseth to advertise you as 
and to emploie yt accordingUe to yor Lordship's direction . 
soever your Lordship had set downe should have tim 
yeat is he very deare at that pryce as horse 
now go, and in respect of his age. 

E E E 



394 



[March, 



I understand by many of your noble and honorable 
station towards me, and the greate good I have 
thereby for manie respectes. I confesse my sealf 
most bound to honor and love your Lordship, and I praie 
unfainedlie to doe your Lordship service and to rest at your 
absolute commaundement, duringe lyfe. And my humble 
suite to your Lordship is, that you wil vowschesafe to 
contynew my honorable good Lord stiU, and to advis 
with your wisdome, whose judgement I do revere 
and of whose favor I shalbe ever moste prowde 
for. I do most depend uppon your Lordship of any ay 
wil geve all manner of triall of my thankefulness . 
which my poore fortune may yeald, and so I cast 
the first parte of my care uppon your Lordship 



next moneth which is the place 

tender us of the wel . . . The King also sendeth for his . • . 
whom he had licensed, and ether we shal take Roan or cost the Duke of Parma 
a battaile. So in al hast I most humblie take my leave. 
Frome Diepe, the xxth of Marche, 1591. 

Your Lordships most assured to comand, 

H. U. 



My good Lord, here is one Mr. Leyghe of Essex, who saithe he is yor Lord- 
ships servant, a very obstinate papist ; he goeth daili to the masse, he hath 
confessed himsealfe and taken the communion after the popish manner, and is 
thought to be reconciled to the Pope. I have had him in examination, and 
have never trusted mi Lord Tresorer but .... that he is your Lordships ser- 
vant. I humble desier some better knowledg of him from your Lordship, for 
I find him wilful and pevishe, and send to restraine him of his libertie till I heare 
frome your Lordship. 



A. D. 1592.] 395 



CCX. 

1592, 

20 Mar. "To the lord Threasurer; by John Muschy." i 

Yt may please your Lordship to peruse theise inclosed ^ coppies of letters 
sent from the Duke of Parma and the Duke De Mayne to the Governors of 
places, which were intercepted by some of the garrison of Corbie ; wherby 
your Lordship may perceave their ^ resolution to succor Roan within three 
weekes at the furdest, and ther feare of the losse of that towne if it be not in 
soch time releived ; for the performance wherof yt seameth they resolve 
to fighte a battaile, and to that end do send for all ther forces to assemble at 
Mondidier the 8th of the next moneth, which is the day and place of ther 
rendezvous of the whole army, from whence they intende to pass to Gornay, 
and so directly to Roan with all possible dilligence ; as by the inclosed may 
more at large apere ; which yesternight late I receaved from the Kinge. 

1 am required by the Kinge to send also his letter to her Majestic here in- 
closed, with all possible speed, beinge not privy to the matter it conteyneth. 
He doth only desire me to send it, for that it importeth him greately and his 
whole estate, and informeth me of the Duke of Parmas resolution to a battaile, 
and of his constant determination to continewe his seige, havinge never more 
hope then att this present to take Roan. He hath also sent present dis- 
patches for all his nobillitie which he had before Ucensed to departe. The 
opinion of the breakinge of his army and the disbandeninge of his forces is 
the only incoragement the enemye taketh to prevaile against him ; wherin, by 
the interceptinge of these letters, the Kinge will prevent them, so that ther 
hope is like to prove vaine. 

The seige of Rue doth goe very slowly forward, for it is of late littell 
advanced ; they may give over their expectation of any good successe ther, if 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office; the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 290. con- 
tains the draft. 

' In the State Paper Office is enclosed in Sir H. Unton's letter, a Copy of a letter from the Due de 
Mayne addressed to Guyonnelle. 

' The draft here commences. 



396 [March, 

this their resolution of succoringe Roan doe continewe. The camp is at St 
Remy and at Noyion. 

Yt did not appere by the Kinges last letters to me that he had receaved ad- 
vertisement from me of the arrivinge of her Majesties troupes, which may be 
parte of the occasion of this his sendinge to hasten them. He earnestly 
requireth the stale of her Majesties pinnasses, or els he saieth all his seige will 
come to nothinge. I imagine he intendeth not otherwise to presse her Ma- 
jestic. 

To morrowe, or uppon Weddensday, I intend to goe towards the camp and 
to goe before our English troupes ; they came very happely and I never had 
more hope of good successe at Roan then nowe, which God graunt ; and with- 
out the which this poore Kinge and his estate must needs be undone. 

Here is one Mr. Leighe of Essex lately come over, who goeth daily to the 
masse ; he hath bene at confession and receaved the Papishe comunion, and I 
feare doth reconcile himselfe to the church of Rome. I have hadd him in 
examination, and I feare he will prove a badd subjecte, albeit not dangerous, 
for that he his simple, but is very wilfuU. He came over without licence ; and 
I have commaunded him to retourne uppon his alleagance, wherin I find 'him 
unwillinge. I humblie beseich your Lordship to instruct me what course I 
shall take with him, and others in the like occasion. And so in all haste 
I most humbly take my leave. 

From Deipe, this 20th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordship's wholly to command. 



The Reitters have receaved but 6000 
crownes, and are to receave to morrowe 
20,000 crownes more by promise, and to 
stale for the rest untill May. I feare their 
payment to morrowe will not be per- 
formed, but it is providinge for them, and 
they shalbe satisfyed with in 5 or 6 
dayes. 

La Mot of Gravelinge is very dange- 
rously sicke, and caried to Gravelinge ; 
and the Duke of Parmas Suisses are not 
yett satisfied. 



Henry Unton. 



A. D. 1592.] 397 



CCXI. 

1592, 

20 Mar. "To Sir Thomas Hennage ; by John Muschy." ' 

Your Honors pardon I crave for this my shorte and hastie scribles ; I had 
an intent by this your Honors servant to write more at large, but time and my 
leasure will not suflFer me, ^ yet would I not fiiile with every fitt occasion to 
entertaine my dutie and your Honors favor with my letters, and of any speciall 
matter to advertise you, as this nowe of the Duke of Parmas resolution 
to succor Roan with in 3 weekes, of his sendinge all post hast for his French 
forces and others, of his rendezvous for them and the whole army to be 
at Mondidier the 8th of this next moneth, and of his constant determination to 
give the Kinge battaile, if he cannot otherwise raise our seege ; wheruppon 
the Kinge hath sent for all his nobUlitie which he had before licensed to de- 
parte, and bothe sides prepaire nowe for a battaile. 

The towne of Roan is in a very great feare and danger, and without a bat- 
taile they cannott be releived. We hadd never more hope of good successe, 
and the enemie never so greate dispaire. God directe all for the beste ; for 
this action wilbe either the Kinges fall or his risinge. 

The seege of Rue goeth very slowly forward, and is of late very littell 
advanced ; yt seemeth the enemie dothe but entertaine time, and the opinion 
therof for this resolution of their succoringe Roan must cutt off their seege 
ther. 

This is all at this tyme worth your Honors knowledge, and I am forced to 
end ; humbly beseechinge your Honor that my letters to you may be used 
accordinge to your Honors discretion, for that others are apt to take advantage 
of nothinge, and are over jelous, wherof I taste daily to my prejudice. So in 
all hast, protestinge all faithfull service unfainedly to your Honor, to whom I 
finde myselfe much bound, I most humbly take my leave. 

Dieppe, this 20th of March, 1591. 

Your Honors wholly to be comanded, 

Henry Uxtox. 

' A draft of this letter is in the Cottonian MS., Cnlig. E. viii. fol. 289. 
* This is the beginning of the Cottonian draft. 



398 [March, 



CCXII. 

1592, 

20 Mar. " To the Earle of Essex ; b5' John Muschy." i 

My most honorable Lord. Your letters of the 9th of this moneth and of 
the 5th, I receaved yesterday; wherby I perceave your noble constancie and 
honorable remembrance of me and my revocation, wherin I only attribute all 
my good ^ unto your Lordship, and will accordingly followe and serve your 
Lordship duringe life with all trewe thanckfullnes. 

To importune your Lordship therin, who is so over forward of yourselfe to 
doe me good, I will not, and I comitt the dewe consideration therof to your 
Lordships wisdome, and cast my only care uppon you ; and Phumbly beseech 
your Lordship not to hinder yourselfe by the furtherance of my sute, but let 
myne followe yours. I protest your good shalbe myne, and I shall take 
as much comforte therof as of myne owne. Your Lordship may take your 
owne tymes, and if my wief or servants doe inconsederately importune your 
Lordship, which I feare, then may your Lordship use your best discretion, 
which shall best contente mee. 

I longe to heare some happie newes of your Honors advancement according 
to your worthynesse, the world is full of bothe, and I barken more after 
it then any thing els. I feare your Lordship is abused by those you trusted 
moste, as I have ben ; and your Lordships vertues are followed with extra- 
ordinary envy, wherof this time is to fuU. 

The Kinge here doth often enquier after your Lordship, and is greedy after 
your advancement for many respects. Your Lordship cannot be more graced 
by a poore Kinge then you are by him dayly in words and speakinge all honor 
of your Lordship ; and Monsr. De Bouillon voweth he is as much yours as 
the Kings, and so will make triall when your Lordship pleaseth to command 
him ; he is very inquisitive after your Honors weldoinge. 

We have newes that the Duke of Parma retourneth to raise our seege, and 
will be within 3 weekes at Roan. He and the Duke De Mayne do send in all 

' The Cottonian MS. contains ^ draft of this letter, at fol. 291. 



A. D. 1592.] 399 

post hast for their garrisons and French horse, as also expect a reenforcement 
out of the Lowe Contries. The 8th day of the next moneth they assemble 
their whole army at Mondidier, which is ther rendezvous, and from thence by 
Gomay directly to Roan; they threaten a battaUe if they cannot raise 
our seige ; and the Kinge havinge licensed his forces hathe nowe sent backe 
for them, so that we had never the like hope of a battaile nor of good successe 
at Roan, which the enemy greately feareth, and not without cause. Of this 
newes your Lordship may assure yourselfe ; for by letters of the enemies, 
which I sent to her Majestic, yt manifestly appeareth. I am forced therfore 
by the Kinge to make a dispatch in all post hast, wherfore I crave to 
be excused for my hastie scribles. And soe I most humbly take my leave, 
with all dewe thanckfiillnesse for your Lordships most honorable care of me. 
From Deippe, this 20th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships most bovmd to 
command, 

Henry Unton. 



CCXIII. 

1592, 

20 Mar. " From Mr. Vicechamberline ; receaved the 24th, 

by Edmonds. " » 

Sir, my absence from the courte for ease of this painefuU disease ^ of the 
goute, and the knowledge I take, upon the reporte of your servant, of 
your speedy retoume hether, which your particular estate requires, was 
cause that I wrote not by Edmonds, whome I would have been ready to 
have done for here, if he should have hadd cause to use me. And so wilbe for 
yourselfe, or soche as you comende unto me, whether your abode be there, 

' The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 523. 
2 Here is the beginning of the Cottonian original. 



400 [Mabch, 

or otherwise, in that I may, even as to a gentleman I wishe all honor and hap- 
pinesse unto. 

And so in regard of the inability of my body, and absence from the Court, 
as your servant Edmonds sawe me att his departure, I am breife, and most 
hartely commend me to your good selfe. 

From my howse at Savoy, this 20th of March, 1591. 

Your assured lovinge freind, 

T. Hennage. 



CCXIV. 

1592, 

21 Mar. " To the lord Threasurer ; by John De Vigne, his boy. " ^ 

My very good Ijord. This morninge I receaved letters from the Kinge in 
answere of myne, that Grove had receaved 300 crownes for the victualinge of 
his pynnasses, and that he should not wante money, but of victualls he saied ^ he 
was not able to furnish them ; also the Kinge complaineth of ther exclamation 
and discontentement without cause, and required me so to certefie your Lord- 
ship, and that without the staie of the pinnasses his seige would come to no- 
thinge, whereof he writeth to me he never had so good hope. 

The enterprise the Kinge lately intended uppon Roan by intelligence, was 
not attempted ; ViUars himselfe imployinge the intelligencers of purpose to be- 
tray the Kinge, which he in tyme discovered ; notwithstandinge two of the 
Chancellor of Navar his brothers was taken by them of Roan in that manner 
as the Governor of Ponte d'Larch was surprised, they went to treate with 
some of those parties that should have delivered the port, and so were 
surprised. 

Yt pleased the Kinge to write to me that he hadd nowe in hand an enter- 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft is in the Cottonian MS. fol. 294. 
^ Here begins the draft in the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 401 

prise of very good hope uppon the towne, which he could not effect before the 
cominge of her Majesties troups to the camp ; and therfore he required me 
to hasten them with all possible dilligence. 

Here is a bruite come to the towne from Feckham that Newe Haven should 
be surprised for the Kinge by Gryllon, Governor of Harflew, who hath ma- 
naged that action longe time with his brother ; and he watcheth the oportunitj- 
to seaze uppon it, and then to hold it for the Kinge. The elder Gryllon went 
thether to New Haven under the collor to see Madame Joyeux, who re- 
maineth ther. I am advertised but yesterday that he went to Newe Haven, 
and could not be suffered to enter to the towne, and that before his cominge 
the Duke De Mayne had given notice therof, and had required them of the 
townes to keepe stronge gardes, and to take heed of bothe the Grillons, wher- 
uppon they hadd a very greate alarum, and did shut upp aU their portes but 
one ; so that this brute of the takinge New Haven hath no probabilitie. It is 
thought that this advertisement of the Duke De Mayne, and jelousie con- 
ceived against the younger Grillon, will make him presently declare himselfe 
for the Kinge. 

Monsr. Jarponville his company of horse is defeated; he lost 30 horse, one 
Captaine, and diverse gentlemen ; he was betrayed of them of Feckham whom 
he trusted, and was drawen on with hope of ther yealdinge the towne to him ; 
they of Feckham have almost 200 horse and doe incommodate us very much. 

Yt is advertised that the Count Soissons is gone to the Kinges sister 
with intent to marrie her, and that shee hath given her faith unto him. The 
Kinge is very much discontented with this newes, the rather because the matter 
is so carried without his privitie ; yt is much feared by them of the Relligion 
that if the marriadge proceed, it will increase the Kinge's troubles in Fraunce ; 
many discourses are made therupon. I did heretofore longe since advertise 
your Lordship of his intended marriage and of her affection to the Count Sois- 
sons ; we have noe certayne assurance of this advertisement. 

I am humbly to beseech your Lordship to graunt your letters to the ports 
of Rye and Dover, to soffer such things to passe as are necessary for my provi- 
sions here for my howse, especially oates for my horses, and some come, 
wherof we have very greate scarcetie, and they are at untoUerable prises ; my 
howse-keepinge is very chargable unto me, and this will somewhat helpe mee, 
without he which nether my horses nor my selfe can Uve ; your Honor may 

F F F 



402 [March, 

greatly favor me herin, and I humbly crave your letters to be delivered to this 
bearer to that effect. So I most humbly take my leave. 
From Diepe, this 21th of March, 1591. 

Your lordships ever to comand, 

Henry Unton. 



CCXV. 

1592, 

23 Mar. "To the lord Threasurer; by John Le Roy. " ' 

My very good lord ; this day we marche to Longueville with her Majesties 
army, and intend to be at Roan uppon Sonday next. Yt pleaseth the Kinge 
to send carts and aU things necessarye for ther march, and accordinge to ^ the 
Kinges commandement we will use aU dUligence, hopinge att ther arrivall ther 
they shall perform e some special! service, wherof your Lordship shall not 
faile imediately to receave advertisement. 

The bruite of the takinge of New Haven proveth false, and the Kings enter- 
pryse by the two Gryllons was discoverede, for whatsoever hee intendeth is as 
soone revealed as resolvede. They of New Haven did take a very great alarum 
uppon the Duke De Mayne his advertisement, so that nothinge was attempted. 
The Kinge hath longe entertained this action of surprising New Haven, and 
hath had many practises in hand, but none hath nor is likely to succead, for 
he is betrayed of his owne whom he trusteth. Monsr. D'Espernon intendeth 
to take his jorney shortely into Provence; he pretendeth the Government 
ther to appertaine unto him, aUeaginge that his brother hadd it from him and 
as his deputie. If he may not enjoy it with the Kings favor, he saieth he will 
mainteyne his right with his sword, and presumeth much of the peoples devo- 
tion to him in that country ; he doth in a manner openly declare himselfe 

1 The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the draft is in the Cottonian MS. Calig, E. viii. 
fol. 295. 
' Here is the commencement of the draft. 



A. D. 1592.] 403 

against the Kinge, as your Lordship may perceave by my former adver- 
tisements. 

The treaty of peace between Monsr. De Plessy and Villeroy is continewed, 
and they both are at Monsr. De Plessy his house by Mantes ; they 
have longe and often debated of the articles and cannot as yet conclude any- 
thinge ; ther is no manner of hkelyhood, yet dothe Villeroy seeme to promise 
and undertake much, and pretendeth that he is more affectionate to the Kinge 
then to the League, and that he dothe not aUowe of the receavinge of the In- 
fante. Monsr. Plessy doth give the Kinge small hope by his letters. 

Yt is alleaged by some inwarde with the Duke De Mayne, that he hathe no 
affection to the cause of the Infante, but entertaineth the same ; fearinge if he 
should not, the Duke of Guyse would wholly imbrace that action, and so make 
himselfe head of the League by that meanes, which is his mothers invention. 
This hath some probabillitie, for that the followers and servants of them bothe 
doe contend for superioritie ; and the ecclesiasticall in Paris doe publickly in- 
vay against Monsr. De Mayne for his harkeninge to a peace and wante of 
courage ; and they rather perswade the people to incline more to the Duke 
of Guise then unto him. This doth somewhat norrishe the faction, which the 
Duke De Mayne dothe dissemble with greate patience. Moreover, the Duke 
De Guise did lately send the Bishop of Avranches into Spaine without the 
Duke De Maynes knowledge, which he tooke very unkindly ; and doth increase 
his jelousy. 
The Infante of Spaine dothe rejecte the affextion of the Emperor ; she is per- 
swaded that he hath the French desease ; neither, as yt is advertised, doth the 
Kinge of Spaine overmuch affect his marriage with the Infante, fearinge if he 
marry her to a great Prince, that they wUl seeke to dispossesse his weake sonne 
of his succession to his crowne, and therefore rather inclineth to marry her to the 
Emperors brother, the Cardinall of Austriche, who is no preiste ; and it is 
thought he will not consent to marry her out of the house of Austriche. The 
Infant is expected in Fraimce the latter end of May, to come to Reims. 

I am advertised that the Duke of Parma hath some intelligence in Bullen, 
wherby he conceaveth very greate hope to take that towne, and that his speciall 
stay in those partes is rather to obtayne that towne then any other. They of 
Bullen have very greate suspition of some amongest them, and upon a late 
execution of foure or five in Rue, somewhat is discovered bothe of his intelli- 
gence in Rue and Bullen ; so that our hope is he wilbe prevented, yet it is 
to be feared. 



404 [March, 

The Duke of Parma contineweth his seige before Rue and maketh his ap- 
proches, but hath not as yett mounted his cannon to batter yt, neither dothe he 
earnestly presse the towne as yett ; he giveth out that he will both take the 
towne and retorne in tyme to raise our seige. We hope he will do neither, 
and it is impossible for him to performe bothe if we hasten our battery as we 
ought to doe, and as the Kinge writeth he will doe. 

The Duke of Parmas army is not above 6,000 foote stronge, his Lorraignes 
longe since are retourned, he hathe not above 1,600 horse lefte, wherof not 
above 200 Reytters ; and in the leavy of the Reytters it is saied he hath gained 
60,000 crownes to his owne purse. He hath but 300 French horse, and very 
fewe French foote. Vaudemont and Bassampierre have taken ther leave to 
retorne in Lorraigne, and the Duke of Guyse departeth this day towards 
Poictou, which sheweth that the Duke of Parma hath no intent to retorne to 
raise our seige, for that then they should not be spared. 

Yesterday I had a spie that came from the enemies campe, who doth cer- 
tefie me so much, and assurethe mee that they have more hope of BuUen then 
of Rue; also he saieth that the bruite in the campe is that 4,000 foote and 
1,200 horse are cominge out of the Lowe Contreis to the reinforcinge of the 
Duke of Parma ; and that if he retourne to raise our seige it will be 5 weekes 
before he can come to us ; and it is doubted he will not come att all, amongst 
many of his Captaines. 

The Kinge went uppon Weddensday last to Louviers to see Monsr. Gieury, 
to crave her Majesties favor that certaine merchants of Bourdeaux might have 
leave to borrow money of some of London for the Kinges payment of his 
Reytters, upon good assurance to be given by them. Wherin I humbly crave 
of your Lordship what answer I shall give the Kinge. Saldaigne goeth nowe 
to Caen to provide money for them. 

Mr. Leigh, of whom I did advertise your Lordship, seameth very penitent 
for his folly, and nowe retourneth by my perswations to submitt himselfe to your 
Lordship and her Majesties grace. He is more wilful! and ignorant then ma- 
litious, and I leave him to your Lordships pleasure. So in hast, redy to march 
with the companies, I most humbly take my leave. 

From Diepe, this 23th of March, 1591. 

Your Lordships to comande, 

Henry Unton. 



A. D. 1592.] 



405 



1592, 
27 Mar. 



CCXVI. 

" To my very good Lord and frend, my Lord Imbasador 
for her Majestie in Frauns. " i 



horse 80"* which price your 
good resons shewed of the fall of . 
of horses in Frauns doth think very . 
Truly, my Lord, I did imediatly write 
your Lordship my letters, which perhaps by th 
have receve, wherby I did desier 
Lordship to make the price yourself . 
was no waies my intention but that 
Lordship shold have him for les than h 
and in no sorte to be overpriced . 

Finding now that your Lordship hath p 
soli before the receit of my letters s 
written to Mr. Smith that in any w 
he shal return back to your Lo 
C. crownes againe, which is xxxli sterUnge 
and if your Lordship shal think the re 
much, it shalbe abated to your ow 
for I wold have your Lordship to have hi 
his price. Thos which brought 
his horses were the caus of this 
and as they set downe it was 
far under his value, which now 
only by your Lordships letter, but by the esti 
of others I find to be true ; namely 

that horses in France ar wonder 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 519. 



406 [MarcHj 

fallen, and mainy more sellers than byers 

the hope of better being now gon and 

troopes disbanding. I remain y 

Lordships assured true frend, wherin to my 

power I neither do nor wil faile to perform 

all the offices of fidelity towards you 

his return will esely bring on your 

revocation, which you shal be sure I wil favour 

to my uttermost. 

27 March 1592, al and ever yours, 

T. BUCKHURST. 



CCXVII. 

1592, 

29 Mar. " From Sir Thomas Hennage ; receaved the 9th. of Aprill, 

by John Symons. " 1 

Sir, for your remembrances and advertisements by John Muschy, my man, 
I thanck you; and thoughe I knowe no reason why any '^ exception should be 
made to you or any man, for writinge to me, consideringe the place I hould, 
and her Majesties likinge to be informed by me, as well as by other of her ser- 
vants, of the state of thinges as they come to our understandinge bothe from 
abroade and at home, yet to avoide that you feare, and to keepe you from 
beinge challenged of those you stand more in awe of, I shall bothe keepe to 
myselfe that you shall write to me (excepte the openinge therof may doe you 
good,) and leave it to your owne choise what and when to write to me, that am 
neither ingrosser of that kinde of ware, nor can be ignorant (when I will,) howe 
things passe both there and in other places. So wishinge to heare well of that 
cause which so much importeth us, and of yourselfe whom I love, and whose 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 521. 
' Here commences the original. 



A. D. 1592.] 407 

retome I looke for ere it be longe, I comende me hartely to yourselfe and Mr. 
Wilks, wishinge you as to myselfe. 

Att the Cort, the 29th of March, 1592. 

Your freind assuredly, 

T. Hknnage. 

To my honorable good freind. Sir 
Henry Unton, Knight, her Majes- 
ties Ambassador in Fiaunce. 



CCXVIII. 



1592, 

1 Apr. " To the Lord Threasurer, from my selfe and Mr. Wilkes, 

by Peter Browne." ' 

May it please your good Lordship. After our departure from Deipe towards 
the camp, we were constrained in respect of our safeties to shape our jorneys 
accordinge to the marches of her Majesties troups, and arrived here the 27th 
of March, from whence the Kinge was departed two daies before with some 
300 horse uppon an enterprise to have intercepted the Duke of Guise 
betweene Gysors and Pontoise, in a voyage towjirds Poictou : but the enter- 
prise failed uppon notice given of the Kinges intention, so as the Kinge 
retourned hether the last of March. We did not attempte to followe the Kinge, 
for the dispatch of our present service as well as for the incertenty of the 
place wher we might find the Kinge, as for the daunger of our travill without 
suflScient convoy. Howebe it, I, Sir Henery Unton, did write unto him 
signifyinge the arrivall of Sir Thomas Wilkes and the importance of the nego- 
tiation. 

Immediately after the Kings retoume we desired audience, which was 
graunted and assigned unto us on the 2 of this presente ; in the meane time we 

' In the S. P. O. is preserved a paper signed by Unton and Wilkes beaded, " The King's present 
aunswer to the articles of our negociation" and endorsed " Primo Apriiis, 1 592. The effect of our 
conference with the Frenche King." 



408 [April, 

thought it fitt to give your Lordship knowledge of the stay of Mr. Thomas 
Wilks, expectinge the retourne of the Kinge, hopinge within 4 daies after the 
writinge hereof to receave the Kinges aunswere, and to retourne with as much 
expedition as the dificulty of the passage and the conveniency of the wynd 
shall permitt. 

Ther is here an expectation of the retourne of the Duke of Parma with in 
12 daies, and the Kinge and his counsell are entred into, consultation what 
course shalbe taken to make head against him ; wherof we cannot say much 
untill the resolution may apere. 

Yt seameth that Roan is into some distresse for victuall, appearinge by the 
disbandinge of many of the souldiers of that garison, who daily abandon the 
towne and submitt themselves to the Kinges mercy, which giveth the Kinge 
and his counsell here greate hope of the timely rendringe of the towne if it be 
not releived by the retourne of the Duke of Parma. And so for this tyme we 
humbly take our leave. 

From Darnetal the 1. of Aprill 1592. 

You Lordships ever to comand, 

Henby Unton. 
Thomas Wilkes. 



CCXIX. 

1592. 

5 Apr. " From Otwell Smith to Sir Henry Unton. " i 

Righte Honorabell. Heare is come to this towne 
Sadanye to fynde 12,000"' to paye the Ryters, the which I doe 
finde hit I doo helpe them to the most part of hit 
he hathe payd you the 771"' and doeth asseure me that 
payd at Rochell, for the which I thank God and am gl 
the .... the deall well with me, I will helpe allways at a 
' From the Cottonian MS. Calig.E. viii. fol. 527. 



A, D. 1592.] 



409 



Yf 



away 



The governor of this towne hatha bene very syke, but nowe is 
amended ; thankes be to God. 

Theare be dyvers Englishe soldyers doe come from the 
beinge lowsye fellowes. I cold staye them all, bowt why th 
reysson I most gyve mony to buye the vytaUs hyt 
Sir Roger Willyms shold send a provote to this towne to 
the gates as the come into the towne souche Engly 
have no pasports from hym, and that the tresorer shold 
hes handes theare payns to kepe them in prysson tyU the 
50. men together, and then to send them backe to the campe. 
be not kept the will roune all awaye in the ende, and th 
caryd awaye aborde the shipes in the nyght, doe what we 
for defens is made in payene of deathe that no man sha 
annye awaye wythoute good pasportes, and yett the be caryed 

Theare is newsse that the enemye hathe levyed his so 

. . and that he wUl come towards Roan agayen 
Theare be twentye or thirtye sealle of shypes of Flemy 
be com hither, which goe into the ryver of Roane with 
Capytayne Parkyns desspersyd home to gett hym a 
the Kynge to gooe to wars agayenst the ... he 
wryten ampelye hymseUfe. I dar think he will dar 
upon this coaste, for thear falles manye hassardes 
as yett all his sowgares be not wayd and parted 
dare hoape wiU shortlie be made an ende of. 

I have red a letter from my Lorde Tressarer, and in the same 
Mr. Grove for the staying of hym in the ryver twoe monnthe 
I send hit in your Honnors packett ; I praye you to lette one of your men 

delyver hit. I have red a letter from my Lorde of 

and becasse I wryte your Honor doeth think the horsse was to . . . 
becasse horsses weare good cheape heare, he hathe ..... 
me to paye unto your Honner thirtye pounde backe agayne 
will sarve for the 100 crouns I payd to Parfett for your Honn 
my Lord wrytes me at no hande bowt that I shall paye tha .... 
to your Honnour, so in my next letter, yf your Lordship pleasse, I wUl wryte 
my . . . that I have payd your Honnour so mouche money. 
. . . Symons the post browght thes letters and 

G G G 



410 [April, 

. . . hand and the seale to . . .he wyll brynge them to your . 
. . . sellfe. Thus I praye the lyving Lorde to have your Honnour in 
His kepynge. Amen. 

In Depe, the v*- of Aprell, 1592. 

Your Honnours servante to comande. 



Otwell Smyth. 



To the ryght honnorabell and my 
good Lord, Syr Henrye Unton, 
Knyght, Lord Imbassador for hir 
Maiestie in Fraunce, at the Campe. 



ccxx. 

1592, 

8 Apr. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Sir Thomas Wilkes." * 

May it please your good Lordship. Uppon conferrence had with Mr. 
Wilkes and perusall of his instructions, findinge the same to consiste of two 
principall heads, the one concerninge the delayes used in the seege of Roan, 
and the other the not performance of the Kings promise in sendinge of 
sufficient force into Brittaigne, and not yealdinge of a towne and haven for the 
safety of her Majesties subjects and shippinge ; — we proceeded with the Kinge 
accordinge to the course of the saied instructions, and have drawen from him 
and his counsel! an answer in writinge, soch as the present state of his affaires 
may well afforde, which shall best appeare unto your Lordship by the reporte 
of Mr. Wilkes, whose cominge hath ben verie gratefull to the Kinge in 
respecte of some deserte of the gentleman towards the Kinge in former times, 
who by his owne experience and the Kinges good opinion conceived of him, 
retoumeth so fully and sufficiently instructed in aU matters, as well from the 
mouth of the Bonge, as otherwise by soche light as I could give him, and by 
his owne diligence and industerie imployed in this service, as yt shalbe 
' The original letter is in the State Paper OfiSce. 



A. D. 1592.] 411 

needlesse for me to trouble your Lordship with any longe discourse to that 
purpose. 

Wee did as well by speech to the Kinge, as by articles in writinge delivered 
aparte to the Kinge alone, urge him for the towne and haven of Brest ; and 
upon the difficultie by him made of the deUvery of that place, we pressed 
him for St. Malo ; which towne, as the Kinge alleaged, had lately offered 
to treate with him either for the restitution to the Kinges obedience, or to 
become neuter in respect of trade ; and therfore consideringe the humors 
of some of his Catholicque counsellors, he durst not (the case so standinge,) 
assent thereunto in perticular, but concluded in sufficient tearmes as that the 
first porte towne, whatsoever should be taken from the enemie, shalbe delivered 
to her Majestic for the retraict of her people. 

By the Kinges advice and directions we delivered our like demands to his 
counsel! in wrytinge with some alteration, willinge us to omitt the nomination 
of any place, to avoide ther jelousie, wherby he might the better worke with 
them for her Majesties satisfaction in the obtayninge of a towne and haven, 
wherof he hath followed theffect of the Kinges answer with the assent of 
his counsell in that point. 

Thus much only I thought meet to imparte unto your Lordship from 
my selfe, leavinge the declaration of the rest to Mr. Wilks, of whose 
sufficiency your Lordship hath sufficient experience. And so for this tyme 
I moste humbly take my leave. 

From Deipe, this 8th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your Lordships ever to command, 

Hkxry Unton. 



CCXXL 



1592, 

8 Apr. " To her Majestic ; by Sir Thomas Wilkes." 

Yt may please your moste excellent Majestic to understand by the relation 
of Mr. Wilkes the matter of our negotiation with the Kinge accordinge to hi* 



412 [April, 

instructions, and the staggeringe state of this contrey, whose cominge hathe 
ben very gratefiill to the Kinge in respecte of his former desertes, and whose 
sufficiencie, credit and understandinge, may serve to excuse me of makinge re- 
citall of that by writinge which he can better relate by speech. Neither can I 
add any thinge to his knowledge, for he is fully instructed in all matters by his 
owne dilligence, my poore helpe, and by the Kinges owne declaration ; wherfore 
he is able to discharge me of all my care to wright. Your Majesties contentation 
I doe only seeke, and in the time of my service will ever run a plaine course, 
neither suppressinge the trewth nor untrewly reportinge it, but representinge 
the state of things as they are, or as I conceave them to be ; and I doe well 
knowe that your Majestic joyneth your private satisfaction with a publicke dewe 
regard, as I will alwaies serve you bothe for publicke and private respectes ; 
wherin if I faile, yt shalbe for lacke of experience, not of dewty, and I wiU never 
cover any ill in me with excuses. 

The favorable acceptation which yt pleaseth your Highnesse to take of ray 
endeavors and devotion doth greately incorage me and infinitely comforte me. 
I cannot yeald so good fruits of my service as I desier and am bound to doe, 
and do most humbly acknowledge your Highnesse goodnesse. If I had many 
lives I would not only hazard them, but loose them, to wittnesse to the world 
my servicable mynde, and doe humbly crave thecontinewanceof your gratious 
conceit, wheruppon my sole and ymediat good dependeth. 

I perceave by your Majesties most gratious letter and the reporte of Mr. 
Wilkes howe much your Majestic of your owne disposition tendreth my care, 
and howe willingly you vouchsaffe to assent to my revocation, and to appointe 
the same uppon Mr .Wilkes retourne ; wherin your Majestic sheweth your kingly 
regard of me, and for the which I give God thanckes that I was so hapely 
borne your subject and do live in the time of so rare a soveraigne. If my 
staie here or ymployment anywhere may importe your Majesties service, I will 
nether feare danger nor regard my expenses ; but this time of insupportable 
charges (which groweth by the extreame dearth of all things,) and the present 
necessitie of my estate at home considered, (wherof Mr. Wilkes can informe 
your Majestic,) these force me to become an humble sutor to your Majestic to 
continewe your former resolution of my revocation, to whose goodnesse I only 
submitt the consideration therof, beinge lothe to importune your Highenesse 
and wilhnge to serve you so as I may serve you longe. And so beseechinge 
the Almightie to continewe your Majesties longe and most prosperous reigne. 



A. D. 1592.] 413 

givinge you all the effects of trewe contentation, I most humbly take my 
leave. 

Dieppe, this 8th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your Majesties most humble and 

obedient subject and servant, 

Henry Unton. 



CCXXII. 

1592. 

1 2 Apr. " To the lord Threasurer ; by my servant David. " ' 

My very good Lord. I am sorry my service bringeth forth no other fhiites 
but unpleasinge advertisements. It is fault of the time and my unhappinesse, 
and it doth not only discorage me, but also make me very weary of my yra- 
ployment in this manner of service and unhappie tyme ; notwithstandinge to 
discharge my dewty, I must not nor will not faile to advertise res gestas, 
thoughe not without greife. 

The 10th of this moneth the Kinge raised his seege, beinge suddenly adver- 
tised of the Duke of Parmas marchinge towards his campe with 12,000 foote 
and 4,000 horse, who was within 4 leagues of Roan before wee did rise, and 
used all possible dilligence in his march to surprise the Kinge and defeate his 
army of Reytters in their logings and ours in our quarters before our rysinge, 
which was only prevented by the Duke of BouUion his discoverie and adver- 
tisement, who made his retraict with the Reytters in viewe of the Duke 
of Parmas army with great hazard and no losse ; but we were forced to march 
away in all hast, and at our risinge had very hott skirmishes, retiringe without 
losse of any, and Sir Roger Williams horse was shott and his hatt in two 
places, who served very honorably with great courage and discretion in 
the viewe of the Bange, greately to his comendations, and with very great 
danger ; and so did many of the Englishe, whoe were the last that made the 
' The original letter is contained in the State Paper OfiSce. 



414 [April, 

retraict that day. Sir Mathew Morgan also deserved very well, and the Eng- 
hshe Captaines with Sir Roger WUliams. 

That night we incamped within a league of Pont de L'arche, expectinge 
the next day the cominge of the Duke of Parma to give us battaile, wherunto 
the Duke of Mayne and Villars did earnestly presse him, without the which 
they alleadged Roan would retourne to former misseries for want of victuaUs ; 
and that by reason of the Kinges weaknesse of horse and want of his nobUlity, 
they might assure him of victory. Herof the Kinge was imediatly advertised, 
and that the enemie had taken resolution to march towards him, and to 
give him battaile before the cominge of his forces. 

Wheruppon the Kinge hath made choise of the place of battaile, if it 
be prosecuted, and expectinge the cominge of the enemy, wherof ther is no 
greate probabilitie, and dothe fortifie and trench the place, resolvinge to 
accepte the battaile; and if the Duke of Parma come not within 4 dales, 
he will gather together 1,500 French cuyrasses and as many harquebushers, 
wheras nowe he hathe not above 700 French horse and not 600 French foote. 

The Kinge was resolved to have made good his seege but was not able for 
wante of horse and foote, neither to give the Duke of Parma battaile, other- 
wise he would never have quitted his seege so much to his dishonor. And it is 
conceaved the Duke of Parma cannot remaine 10 dales on this side the river 
of Some for want of victuaUs, havinge left mooste parte of his baggage behinde 
him, and wantinge meanes to victuall the towne ; and to victuall so greate a 
towne by waggons in a short tyme is impossible ; and therfore the Kinge giveth 
out he will retourne to the seige againe, 668 f K. 9 a. 62 and 8. 1 K K daraki, ' 
as also many of his chosen counsellors. 

The Duke of Parma lodgeth at Croissett, and his army alonge the river, and 
hath entered Roan with some fewe, but his gardes could not be suffered 
to enter. He will putt in freshe companies and victuall the towne as much 
as he may, and discharge the towne of maney idle people that consume the 
victuall ther ; and sendeth to all the castells and gentlemens houses where 
ther is greate store of come not farr of, to cause them to bringe it to Roan 
which was our greate oversight, and the sparinge or those places wUbe greatly 
to the Kinges prejudice. 

When he hath settled aU things ther, it is tbought he will beseige 42878384 ^ 

' Decyphered in the margin of tlie S. P. O. " Whereof I have noe opinion." 

^ Caudebec. This and fhe following cyphers are explained in the margin of the original in the State 
Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 415 

or els retoume to Rue, wher he hath lefite some companies within a league 
therof. If the former take place, Bristoll ' cannott hould out, and greate 
feare is conceaved of Leinster, ^ for the enemie dothe in a manner possesse the 
whole contrey. 

Upon Saterday next Vespasianus * marcheth to 18 and 9462 n 8 + * with his 

2 fh+5to beseige, which way Almodeus, ^ must neede passe and cannott 
avoide the 32 n n 8 rr. ^ If Vespasianus can gett before him thether, unlesse 
Almodeus ^ retome by Shrowesbury ^ and ovir S 2 f n 9 "• may bee victualled 
from BrystoU ". In the meane tyme Vespasianus expecteth more forces from 
Emanuell, ^^ and saieth he will delaie the 32 n n 8 rr i^ in hope therof, wherin 
I doe altogether discourage him, and refuse to write therof to her Majestie, 
beinge myselfe discouraged here with our ill successe, and untowardley proceed- 
inges. 

Haran &gt;* hath lately reseaved money from Bersa, i^ and hathe maried Ves- 
pasianus sister at a masse, which is very strange, and doth greately trouble 
Vespatianus and many more. It is constantly reported and beleived, but not 
assured, yet very probable. Architophel '^ is as much discontented with 
this newes as Vespasianus, fearinge he will deminishe his reputation for many 
respects, which your Lordship may conceave. 

The dissembled yeare is yet entertained, but not likely to take effect ; 
whether it breake or conclude, it is intended only to abuse, as by certaine 
thynges lately discovered may appeare, which I dare not send here inclosed, 
and reserve untill a fitt opportunitie be offered. 

I am forced to write in cipher, fearinge the miscarriage of my letters, 
havinge no safe meanes to convey them nowe the seige is levied ; and ther- 
fore crave to be excused if your Lordship heare not from me so often as here- 
tofore, and beinge forced to hazard nowe this bearrer in a pesants attyre, whom 
I humbly beseech your Lordship to consider extraordinarily in respect of his 
perill and paines. And I intend to send a double of my dispatches from time 
to time, for feare of ther miscaryinge. We are nowe penned upp in a corner 
and do indure all manner of misseries, especially our forrage for our horses, 
which will force our army shortely to breake. 

So leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, I most humbly take my leave. 

' Deepe. ' Army. ' Pavys. " Battell. 

'Normandy. * The Duke of Parma. "Army. "Co. Soissons. 

3 The French Kinge. 'Battell. " Depe. '^ Kingof Spayn. 
&lt; Newf-chastell. « The Duke of Parma. i^ q. of England. " Duke of Mayn. 



416 [April, 

From the Campe, within a league of Pont de L'arch, and with in 2 leagues of 
Roan, this 12th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your Lordships ever to comand, 

Henrt Unton. 



CCXXIII. 

1591, 

12 Apr. " To Sir Robert Cecill, by David. " 

Sir, I hope your Honor will excuse me for not writinge by Mr. Wilks, 
whose sooden departure and my shorte warninge would give me noe manner 
of leasure, whom I desired to make my excuse and to imparte our occurances 
here, the rather for that I found him greately affected to your Honors service, 
which made me trust him the more and love him the better. Sence his de- 
parture we were forced to raise our seege, and quitted it the 10th of this 
moneth, the Duke of Parma beinge within 4 leagues of our campe, and march- 
inge in all diUigence to surprise us in our quarters ; which if he hadd done, he 
hadd defeated the Kinge and all his army. And had not the Duke of Bouillon 
gone to warr and discovered his army, with greate hazard, but no losse, I as- 
sure your Lordship we hadd ben overtaken before we hadd receaved any ad- 
vertisement of the enemie, he did make so silent and quick a march towards 
us. The Kinge hadd nether sufficient forces to mainteine his seige, nor to 
give the Duke of Parma battaile, and he wanted all his French horse and foote 
which are not yett come to him ; so that he was forced to leave the seige and 
to retire towards Ponte L'Arch, incampinge within a league therof, wher he 
continueth expectinge the cominge of the enemie, who threateneth to give us 
battaile where we are, before the cominge of the Kinges forces, so that we 
attende him with resolution to accepte battaile if it be offered, and do fortefie 
and intrench ourselves in the place fittest for battaile. I thinck it will prove a 
Spanishe Bravado. 

Yf the Duke of Parma stale but 5 or 6 dales we will waite uppon him and 
presente him battaile, and force him to fight to repaire the Kinges honor, so 



A. D. 1592.] 417 

that very shortely I doubt not but your Honor shall heare of some great mat- 
ter. In the meane season we hange downe our heads for this late dishonor, 
and as men greived and discontented seeke desperately after revenge, which 
will be attempted as soone as our French horse and foote arrive, which doe 
nowe come daily into the Kinge. The Duke of Parma incampeth at Croysset 
alonge the river, with his army, and hath entered Roan in trivmaph with some 
fewe, but his gards were not suffered to enter. He placeth fresh men in ga- 
rison there, and withdraweth all the idle people that consume victuals, fearinge 
our retoume to the seige ; and he beinge not able in a shorte time to victuall 
Roan by waggons. I could advertise your Honor of our designes nowe in hande, 
but I dare not, for want of a cyphar, fearinge the interceptinge of my letters 
by the enemie, which might give him hght ; wherfore I beseech your Honor 
to send me a cyphar that I may the better and more saffely advertise you. 

We can nowe send no letters with any safetie, which is my greife, wherfore 
your Honor may the rather nowe furder my retorne, wherin you shall greately 
binde me. 

In the meane season, and ever, I will pray for your increase of honor, and 
remajme, 

Yours wholly to command, 

Henry Unton. 
From the Campe, within a league 
of Pont de L' Arche, this 12th of 
Aprill, 1592, 



CCXXIV. 

1592, 

16 Apr. " To the Ryght honorable, my very good Lorde, the 

Lorde highe Treasorer of Englande. ' " 

My very good Lord. All our army beinge now in battaille att this place of 
Fresnay, wee receave advertisement that yt is not the Duke of Parma his 
' From the original in the State Paper Office, France, 1592. 
H H U 



418 [April, 

sonn but himselfe that is shott in the arme with a muskett, but the bone 
is not offendede; notwithstandinge yt is conceavede that hee is in dawn- 
ger ; which yf yt should happen, all his army must neades bee defeatede 
for want of a gennerall to conduct yt ; for Monsr. de Mayne is disdaygnede 
rather then respectede in the Duke of Parmas army. 

The Duke of Parma is yeat befor Caudebec, and hath batterede yt but with 
one peece ; hee was plantynge this day other of his cannon to batter yt, and was 
not this mornynge advertisede of the Kinges niarchynge towardes him. But he 
hath now taken the allarme, and hee is so ingagede as hee must neades fyght 
a battaille, as wee conceave, or loose part of his army in his marchynge, which 
wee will cutt of. 

Wee are now beetweene him and Neufchastel, so that hee hath noe way to re- 
torne but by Roan and Beauvois, and wee may advance befor him and cutt of 
his victuaUes, so as hee will famishe his army. This is the conceipt and assur- 
ance of our men of warre, which I leave to your Lordshipes consideration. 
And the Marshiall of Byron requestede me to sende theise Frenche notes in 
wrytinge, the better to expounde the platt which I sende your Lordship, i So 
in all hast, from Fresnay, the place of rendezvous, marchynge from thence 
this nyght in order of battaille to Angleville, this 16th of Apryll, 1592. 

Your Lordshipes to commande, 

Henby Unton. 

Wee are uppon vieu 12,000 foote stronge and 4, 500 horse, all rangede in bat- 
taille ; more are dayly expectede. 



ccxxv. 

1592, 

16 Apr. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Romano. " 2 

My very good Lord; I send your Lordship here inclosed the dooble of my 

^ None of these enclosures are preserved. 

' The original letter is preservedin the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 419 

last dispatch, fearinge the miscarringe therof ; wherby your Lordship may un- 
derstand what the Duke of Parma and the Kinge then intended ; and by this 
dispatch your Lordship may perceive what hath sence followed. 

The 13th of this moneth, the Duke of Parma marched towards Caudebec, 
and with his vantgard did that night invest the same^ where our shippes in the 
river played uppon them with their artillery, killinge many, as also did fight 
with the gaily of Roan and with 4 other shipps that came from New Haven 
into the river ; but without any losse to ours. This is the Kinge advertised, 
wherof I heare nothinge ii-om the EngUshe pynnasses. 

The 14th, the Duke of Parma himselfe did sitt downe before Caudebeck, and 
in his approches his sonne the Prince was shott in the arme, and is in some 
danger, as some prisoners of the enemie confesse. Diverse ako are saied to be 
hurte. 

Yesterday, beinge the 1 5th, the enemie planted his cannon before the towne, 
with resolution presently to batter it. The towne is so weake as it cannott in- 
dure battery, nor make any resistance, nether dothe the Kinge expect it should 
hould out, albeit we have no newes of the takinge of it ; and yesterdaie the Kinge 
marched 5 leagues to this place with his whole army, not hopinge to raise the 
seige, and assuringe himselfe that the Duke of Parma is so nowe ingaged as 
he shalbe forced to fight, as by a plat ^ inclosed, which I expresly caused to be 
made to send to your Lordship, it may appere ; so that the battaile cannott be 
avoided, and the Kinge most resolute to force him to it, hasteninge himselfe 
towards the Duke of Parma and intendinge this day to march 5 leagues 
with his whole army. God is the God of battailes and giveth the victorie, 
wherof we presume in respect of the goodnesse and justice of the cause ; and 
His wil be done with mercy. 

Since our ray singe of the seege the Dukes Monpensyerand Longeville, with 
many other troupes, are joyned with the Kinge, and more dailie expected ; so 
that his army is with in theise 3 dales increased by 2,000 French foote and 
1,000 French cuyrasses, besides many harquebusiers on horsebacke ; and he 
hath nowe altered his former resolution of beseiginge Newfchastell and march- 
eth in a manner directly towards the enemy, so as to morrowe we shall incampe 
within two leagues one of another. The Kinge is very desirous that Sir John 
Norris, with soch troupes as are appointed for Brittaigne, may passe this way, 
and be at the battaile, but in my opinion they will come shorte of the battaile ; 

' This enclosure does not remain. 



420 [April, 

yet the Kinge saieth he will temporize as much as he may in hope therof. I 
tell him it is impossible they should come so soone, and do therin altogether 
discomforte him. 

In our yesterdaies march we did take the castell of MartinviUe with divers pri- 
soners within it, with the losse of one man only ; and in our march Chevalier 
Brytton was incountered with some of our horse and taken prisoner at night. 
We failed surprisinge many of the enemie in this loginge, who did but dislodge 
as our forryers came to take upp the logings ; and it is thought that this night 
we shall dispute our lodginge with the enemie, which wiU cost blowes ; and if 
Caudebec be taken, we shall upon the Duke of Parmas departure take it agayne, 
and in the meane season offer him battaile ; wherof I hope very shortely to 
advertise your Lordship. 

Roan is yett victuallede with nothinge but catteH, and noe greate store ther- 
of, and of come there is very lytle carryede into the towne. Theyr greatest 
hope is to bee fumyshede of come from Caudebec, where there is greate store ; 
and from New Haven by the ryver, which the king will hynder as much as hee 
can. They of Roan have burnede Damettall and all our quarters of both sydes 
the ryver, but the Chartreux, fearinge our retorne to the seidge agayne. ' 

Harran ^ his receavinge money from Bersa ' is confirmed, and very secretly 
kept ; his marriage not assured, but all manner of presumptions therof are ad- 
vertised, especially her receavinge and entertayninge him most familiarly, and 
most secret conferences. 

Our heads are so full of the battaile, as we thincke of nothinge els and neglect 
allother advertisements. 

So havinge nothinge els worthy your Lordships knowledge, I most humbly 
take my leave. 

From Fontayne le Bourg, this 16th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your Lordships ever to comand, 

Henry Unton. 

' This passage occurs in tlie State Paper Office original, but not in the Bodleian copy, 

'' Count Soissons. 

' K. of Spayne, sodecyphered in the State Paper Office original. 



A.D. 1592.] 421 



CCXXVI. 

1592, 

18 Apr. " From the lord Threasurer ; receaved the 27th, by 

John Muschy. " 

My Lord Ambassador; yesterday, beinge the 17th, your letters were 
brought to me dated betwixt Pont de larche and Roan, the 12th of this 
moneth, by a Frenchman ; which were the first I receaved from you sence the 
Kinges departure from Roan, wherof fower daies before we hadd then report 
from Dieppe, to our greate greefe, findinge your report somewhat better then 
the former ; and soe we doe hope hereafterwards to heare some better reso- 
lution of this disastre. The partie that brought the letter reported from the 
mouth of the governor of Diep, and so Otwell Smith wrote, that the Duke of 
Parma had receaved a hurte in his arme by a shott out of Caudebec, wherof 
I doubt not but by your next, if it be trewe, we shalbe certified. 

Her Majestic hath comanded a letter to be written to the French Kinge to 
licence you to retourne, and another letter from herselfe to permitt you to doe 
the same, least your departure from the Kinge might discourage the people 
nowe in this his extremitie. Her Majestie also hath written bothe to the 
States Generall and Count Maurice to yealde a further aide to the Kinge of 
3,000 or 4,000 at this tyme, which they may well spare ; and if the Kinge by 
his letters will earnestly presse, I hope it shall take place to his good. And 
so in hast I comende me very hartely to your Lordship. 

From Westmester, this 18th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your lordships most assured 
lovinge freind, 

William Burgley. 

To my honorable good freinde. 
Sir Henry Unton, Knight, her 
Majesties Ambassador in Fraunce. 



422 [April, 



CCXXVII. 
1592, 

19 Apr. "From Sir Robert Cecill; receavedthe 27th, by- 

John Muschy. 



3J 



Sir, I am much sorrier today then three daies sence, when I willed your 
soUicitor Clyfford to assure my Lady your wife, whose desier of your retoume 
I finde is infinit, that your, discharge for some convenient tyme to come 
into England should be signed imediatly. I had caused the letters to 
be drawen ; and had not the newes of the Duke of Parma his straightninge the 
Kinge bene brought hether, the letter of your revocation had receaved no im- 
pediment ; wherin I assure you one my honestie, I have dealte so carefully as 
if it had ben for or conceminge my owne fortune. The Queene hath only 
thus deferred it, that till shee be againe advertised of some alteration of the 
Kinges estate, and the Duke of Parma either goinge away or resolution of 
residence, she would not offer so publicke a disgrace to him nowe for 
one fortenight or 3 weekes as to retract her Ambassador uppon the soodainej 
of which the adverse partie happely would make their advantage. Let it ther- 
fore worke no doubt nor impression ; for I dare assure you your stale shall 
not be to any purpose ; but resolutely her Majestic is entertained to give you 
leave with aU grace and favor to retourne, and to leave Edmonds behind you. 
This messenger hasteth awaie ; and aU things that may concerne your freinds 
preferment remaine juste as they did, without either good likelihood or 
the contrarie. Sir John Parret shalbe arraigned on Thursday sevenight, he 
was indicted 8 daies sence. 

My lord of Essex hath ben a forcible meane of your retoiirne, and in truth 
Sir Thomas Wilkes did you very trewe and honest offices in his report. By 
my next I hope to send you pasport, and so I take my leave. 

From the Cort, this 19th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your very lovinge and assured freind, 

Robert Cecill. 
To my honorable and lovinge freind, * 
Sir Henry Unton, Knight, her Majesties 
Ambassador with the French Kinge. 



A. D. 1592.] 423 



CCXXVIII. 

1592, 

21 Apr. " From Sir Henry Unton to Sir Robert Cecill." i 

Your Honour may perceave by my letters to my noble Lorde your father our 
proceadinges heare and howerly expectation of a battaille, which will ende 
many of our miseryes heare ; wee hope of good successe in respect of 
the goodnes of our cause, and God, wee presume, will bee our God and fight 
for us, wherof wee have neade. This endede, I crave the continuance of your 
favor for my revocation, which dothe highely importe me in respect of 
my estate, wherof yt hath pleasede her Majestic to have commiseration, and 
I doubte not but your Honour will have care, uppon whome I greatly relye. 

Yf want of rest and of victualls, feare of dawnger, insupportable expenses 
and wearysom traveU, may afflyct a man and distast him, then want not 
I afflyction nor discontentment, and therfor wishe an ende of this cowrse of 
lyfe and manner of employment ; yeat in respect of Her Majesties service I 
thynke all to lytle, and wiU spende therin both lyfe and lyvinge. But this 
jomy of the Duke of Parmas beinge att an ende, or this battaille, I then hope 
to bee releasede. In the meane season I th3nike none doth envye my 
now condition. 

Thoughe I want matter and leasure to wryte as I would to your Honour, 
yeat would I not fayle of my dutyfull remembrance and honest aflFection, which 
I trust is excusable. You have power over me, and I have the same devotede 
mynde towardes you which I had att any tyme, and will ever beare towardes 
you and yours. I leave farther att this tyme to trowble you, and doe assure 
your Honour that none shall more honore and love you then my selfe, whoe 
rest ever 

Att your commandiment with my 
uttermost. 

From Varqueville, this Henry Unton. 

21th of Apryll, 1592. 

' From the original in the State Paper Office France, 1592. A copy of this letter is in the copy book, 
where it is dated 16 April. 



424 [April, 



CCXXIX. 

1592, 

21 Apr. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Percevall." 

My very good Lord. The 16th of this moneth, the Kinge loged at Varque- 
ville and in the villages therabouts with his whole army, accordinge to 
his former resolution. That day the Duke of Parma battered Caudebec, 
havinge no advertisement of our marchinge towards him, wherofthe Kinge was 
right glad, hopinge so to ingage him as to force him to fight, and expectinge 
daily more of his forces. 

The l7th, we dislodged, marchinge towards Ivetot, within two leagues 
of Caudebec, wher he intended to loge his army, but in his march he was 
advertised of the rendringe of Caudebec that mominge to the enemie by com- 
position, beinge noe longer tenable, and that the Duke of Parma was risen and 
had incamped his owne army with in a league of Ivetot, in the open feild, 
wher he was strongly intrenched ; and the Dukes of Mayne, and Guise, with 
all his army, beinge 2,000 horse and 1,200 foote loged at Ivetott. Wheruppon 
the Kinge marched towards them with all his army in order of battell, and 
with 10 peeces of artUlere, untill he was within a myle and a halfe of the ene- 
mies campinge. There he made a stande with all his army in a large feild, and 
himselfe with 500 horse advanced further to discover the enemie. The Duke 
De Mayne, with 1,000 horse shewed himselfe, intendinge to force us to retire, 
whom the Kinge charged with two troupes of horse and pursued them to their 
quarter with great dishonor to them, in which charge they loste Monsr. 
Coutenan a speciall comander of horse, who was taken prisoner ; who assured 
the Kinge that the Duke of Parma had but then taken the alarum of our com- 
inge, and would not beleeve that the Kinge durst looke upon him ; if he did, 
he saied he was resolved to give us battaile. 

This newes did very much contente the Kinge, and therfore retired in tyme 

to lodge his army in the villages rounde aboute the place where he made his 

stand with his army ; preparinge the next dale to give the Duke of Parma 

battaile if he would accepte it neare Ivetot, in a faire champien feild fitt 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 425 

for it. The Kinge lodged himselfe at Motteville, and placed his cannon in the 
feild that night well garded. 

Early in the mominge the next dale, beinge the 18th, the Kinge did drawe 
all his forces together into the feild adjoyninge to his quarter, expectinge 
the enemy ; but findinge no likelihood of their preparation to fight, the Kinge 
resolved to force their loginge of Ivetot, and to loge there in dispite of them ; 
or eUs to force them to accepte the battaile. He therfore marched with his 
whole army, and advanced certeine cuyrasses and harquebusiers on horsebacke 
before to observe the enemyes countenance, who marched towards us with 
horse and foote ; and perceavinge the Kinge with his forces to come on so re- 
solutely, ofiFeringe to charge them, they retyred most dishonorably, quittinge 
their quarter, settinge yt on fier, and fledd in disorder untill they came to the 
Duke of Parma his quarter; where he was incamped. The Kinge with 
his saied troupes of horse hadd them in chase, himselfe conductinge them, kill- 
inge many and takinge some gentlemen prisoners, amonst whom the Baron of 
Chastre, sonne to Monsr. La Chastre, was taken ; and 80 at the least slaine, 
and the reste defeated. The Duke De Mayne hardely escaped, for he fled so 
fast his horse was like to faile him for want of breth. Some Spaniards were 
also taken, wherof my footeman did take one, and one other of my servants 
kiUed also one, wher at the Kinge was very merry. 

That night we loged att Ivetot, and the rest of our army in the villages 
a league beyond it, which we forced the enemie to quit, and our army incamped 
with in 3 quarters of a myle of the Duke of Parmas intrenchment, who 
was very much amated with this dishonor, and did imagine that he was 
betrayed by them. 

The 19th, we staied at Ivetot, ofFeringe many skirmishes to the enemie, 
which they coldly entertayned ; and the Duke of Parma continewed within his 
trenches with moste of his army very quietly, not suffieringe anie great 
skirmishes, fearinge it might drawe on the battayle, and his horse were beaten 
into his trenches ; yet nothinge could move him. 

The 20th, the Kinge dislodged with his whole army, and marched to this 
place, beinge a myle and halfe from Ivetot towards Newhaven, which way the 
Duke of Parmas army most lodged. This the Kinge did of purpose to cutt of 
his victualls from Newhaven and those parts, from whence he is cheifly 
victualed, and for want therof to force him to a battaile ; and by this loginge 
the Kinges victuels may more safely and comodiously come to his army from 

I I I 



426 [April, 

Deip, from St Vallery in Caux, and other places, wherof wee have as greate 
scarcety, especially of bread and wyne, which doth cost 4 tymes so much as in 
the seege before Roan, and yett cannott be had for money. 

After we were quartered and loged, the enemies horse made out towards us, 
and certeine of ther foote were laied in ambush to drawe us uppon them, 
wheruppon the Kinge sent for Sir Roger Wilhams to come to him with 200 
musketts and 150 pykes of his best ; whoe were noe sooner come to the King 
but five cornettes of Spanishe and ItaUen horse charged them before any horse 
of ours could come to succor them. The EngUshe encountred them with so 
great resolution and corage, as they did take two or thre cornetts ; wherof 
one the Kinge sendeth to her Majestic, the other is torne by the souldiers. 
Dyvers of the cheife leaders of the horse were slaine, and many other besides 
very many hurte of the enemie ; 600 Spanishe foote with musketts and pikes 
came to seconde ther horse and entred a very hott skirmishe with the Englishe. 
In the meane time other Englishe companies came to second ours. In the 
end they forced the enemies horse and foote to retire into ther quarters with 
very great dishonor to them and great losse. Of our Englishe, 40 were hurte 
and eight slaine. Captaine Rushe was shott in the thighe, no other man of 
qualitie hurte or slaine of them. 

Sir Roger Williams unarmed served most honorably, who did unhorse ther 
best leader ; and incountringe besides with George Basta did, as it is thought, 
hurte him in the necke, givinge him a very great blow with his sworde. The 
Kinge doth comend him very highely, and dothe more then wonder at 
the valoure of our nation. Sir Mathewe Morgan and his brother served very 
vahantly, and Capten Henery Poore ; so did the reste of the captaines that 
were ther, wherof I knowe your Lordship shall heare more particularly from 
others. This service dothe greately encourage our men and discourage the 
enemie, and I never heard the Kinge to give more honors to any service, nor 
to any men, then he doth to this, and to Sir Roger Williams, whom he held as 
lost men, and for the which he hath caused publicke thancks to be given 
to God. Our men had very good spoiles of the enemie. 

The galley of Roan was lately taken by the shippes in the ryver, which doe 
nowe very good service to the Kinge to impeach the enemies passage with 
victuall from Newhaven alonge the river to succor Roan and the Duke 
of Parmas army. 

A letter of the Duke of Parmas, sent to the Kinge of Spaine, is lately inter- 



A. D. 1592.] 427 

cepted and brought to the Kinge, wherin he representeth the misery he is in 
for want of sufficient forces to encounter the Kinge, and his want of victualls 
and meanes to retoume. He complaineth greately of the Duke of Mayne and 
the French, and that they have in a manner betraied him ; wherof he saieth 
he hath hadd heretofore jelousie. He concludeth that he must hazard the 
losse of his army, and without fightinge cannott retoume. This letter was yes- 
terday intercepted, he is shoott in the arme betweene the bones, wherof 
he must needs be maimed, as the surgens give out. The hurte is not 
dangerous of it selfe, yet his sickley body, and the accydents that usually 
followe soch hurts doe give some cause of doubt to his phisitions; he is car- 
ried in a litter, and cannott ride as yet on horsebacke. 

The Kinge resolveth either to famishe him or to fight with him in his 
trenches, if he will not otherwise accepte the battaile ; which wilbe with great 
disadvantage, if he force the Duke in his intrenchment, but that shalbe the last 
attempte. In the meane season we skirmish daiely, lege both our armies with 
in 3 quarters of a myle of each other, and keepe our gards so neare as they speake 
together continually ; and howe longe this will continewe we cannott conjecture, 
albeit we perswade ourselves it must needs end with a battaile, or a very great 
overthrowe. We feare nothinge but his steallinge away in the night, which 
wilbe to his greate dishonor, and he cannott march so fast but we shall over- 
take him and fight with him in his march or in his loginge. 

Many troupes of horse and companies of foote doe daiely come to the 
Kinge ; he is nowe 2,600 French cuyrasses stronge and 800 harquebusiers on 
horsebacke, besides 3,000 French foote ; more are daily expected. He sendeth 
for all his garrisons near him, and the longer the Duke of Parma delayeth to 
fight, the stronger will the Kinge be. 

I am the bolder to particularize all things to your Lordship and to insist 
upon them, because you may the better judge of our proceedings and Ukelihood 
of future successe ; and our lives and reputations are so much ingaged as we 
thincke uppon no thinge ells. Wherfore I hope you will pardon my troublesome 
and tedious advertisements of this only action nowe in hand, wherof I doubt 
not but your Lordship wilbe as willinge to heare as I am to write, for that it 
concerneth, not only Fraunce but Christendome ; and [I] do the rather write 
particularytie for that your Lordship advised me so to doe when the Duke 
of Parma made his last viage. Other advertisements are nothinge materiall 



428 [April, 

and therfore not worthy the writinge. So leavinge farther to trowble your 
Lordship I most humbly take my leave. 
From Varqueville, the 21st of Aprill, 1592. 

Your Lordships to commande, 

Henry Unton. 



CCXXX. 

1592, 

24 Apr. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Addams. " 

My very good Lord ; since my last dispatch of the 21th, bothe armeyes 
have contihewed in ther quarters without dislodginge, entertayninge con- 
tinuall skirmishes without great losse to either; surprisinge one anothers 
gards, and the Kinge maketh all manner of offers to force the Duke of Parma 
to battaile, but the Duke utterly refiisinge it, yet makinge shewe of his willing- 
nesse, for his army is ranged in order of battaile all day longe, pretendinge to 
accepts the battaile. 

The Kinge, perceavinge that nothinge can force the Duke of Parma to fight 
without enterprise uppon him in his trenches, did therfore this morninge as- 
semble all his force and foote, in order of battaile, and did drawe out of his 
foote 400 English, 400 Scottishe (shott and pike,) and 800 French (shott and 
lancequenets ;) he comanded them to force the quarter of the Duke of Parmas 
vantgard, beinge most Spaniards and Wallons and some French, who were very 
strongly intrenched, well fortefied and manned with 18 companies of foote, 
some say more. The point was given to the Enghshe, and the rest comanded 
to give into severall places of the quarter. They accordingly attempted it with 
great courage and resolution ; the enemie at the first did very vaUiently defend 
ther quarter, imtUl ours came to the pushe of the pike with them, then they 
quitted yt, and they were the fijst that entred. Before the entrey there 
was very great vollys of shott in bothe sides, as also after ther entry (the 
' The original of this letter is in the State Paper OfiBce. 



A. D. 1592.] 429 

enemy maMnge resistance) but ours carried it away, killinge a 120 Spaniards 
and Wallons in the place and many captaines and comanders ; very many of 
them were hurte and some taken prisoners, the rest were defeated and 
fledd. 

In their flight the Barron of Biron, and Monsr. Mahgny, with a company 
of horse, charged them, killinge and hurtinge very many of them ; the nomber 
slaine not certenly knowen, because they were rescued by theirs, and were very 
neare the rest of enemies army. 

A ColoneU of the Spannyardes was ther slaine, and diverse men of mark ; the 
Barron Biron and Monsr. Maligny served very bravely. Sir Roger Williams 
did conduct the 400 Englishe that entred the quarter, and was continually in 
the head of them ; he served most honorably and with great resolution ; and 
bothe he and the Englishe have in this service gained the cheifest reputation ; 
which the Kinge dothe acknowledge. 

The Kinge was present at this service and directed all, he did adventure his 
persone to much in the heat of their shott, and escaped the danger of ther 
shoot very hardly diverse tymes, which doth greeve all them that love him 
to see him adventure so muche. In this service the Kinge hath not lost 20 : 
diverse of his are hurte, but none of accompte, most of them were killed with 
the enemies cannon, which played continually uppon us, as ours did uppon 
them ; and bothe the armies did approche as neare as they could, with some 
fewe peces of artillerie makinge counter battery, but theirs did most hurte in 
respect of ther advantage of the ground. These peces of artillery on bothe 
sides are retired to ther former places, and the Kinge doth not loge any com- 
panies in the quarter surprised, beinge not able to make it good without great 
advantage to the enemy incomodatinge our army. 

The Duke of Parma, notwithstandinge his dishonor and losse, would not 
accepte the battaile which the Kinge did offer ; hee beinge resolute to give it. 
Att one tyme his army began to make head towards us, and advanced in order 
of battaile, wherunto the Kinge was prepared, makinge this attempt uppon the 
quarter of the vantgard, rather to drawe on the battaile, then with hop© to force 
it ■ but nothinge would move the Duke of Parma therunto. He threateneth 
a revenge and is very much discontented, imagininge that his French force doe 
betraie him. He is very ill of his late hurte, and hath hadd a feaver ; yt dothe 
much weaken him, and make him for the most parte keepe his bedd, and he hath 
hadd three spUnters taken out of his arme. 



430 [April, 

They have very great want of victual! in ther army by reason of our intercep- 
tinge yt. The Uuke of Longueville did yesterday take very many of ther wag- 
gons charged with victualls. The French doe dayly disband for want therof, 
and they cannot longe continewe here without famine. The sickenesse is very 
greate in their campe. They are makinge a bridge at Caudebec with boates, 
which is almost finished, and made of purpose either for the Duke of Parmas 
retraict, or to have victualls come unto him out of Base Normandie, thinckinge 
to weary us out, and then to force our army to break first, for want of victual], 
wherof we have noe greate store ; but it is rather thought he will retire over 
the water at Caudebec, and by that tyme we shall have passed our army at 
Pont de PArche, he maie repasse on this side ; and so steale from us. This 
feare causeth the Kinge the sooner to force the battaile uppon him, and to 
make theise hazardous attemptes; but de futuris vre c&amp;r\. speak but conjec- 
turally. 

The Kinges army increaseth dayly with fresh horse and foote that come unto 
him out of diverse partes, but the Englishe and Lowe Contrey forces are very 
much weakened. They disband and fall sicke, yett are they the strength of the 
Kinges infanterie, and uppon whom he most relieth. In the late skirmishe the 
Englishe made the younge Prince of Parmas horse was shott, and he escaped 
very dangerously. Thus havinge nothinge els worthy your Lordships adver- 
tisement, I moste humbly take my leave. 

From the Campe, at Varqueville, this 24th of Aprill, 1592, 

Your Lordships ever to comand 

Henry Unton. 
I have receaved no letters from your Lordship 
sence the 14th of March, neither in this tyme 
of danger can I procure any post to at- 
tende me, by whome I may send to your 
Lordship. 



A. D. 1592.] 431 



CCXXXI. 

1592, 

25 Apr. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 10th of May, by 

Thomas the French Cooke. " 

My Lord, I hope you doe beare with me, in not so often writinge to you, as 
you doe to me ; first wee here have no other cause to write of, but to certefie 
you of the receipt of yours, of which also we are daUy so desirous as nothinge 
Cometh to me more joyefull then to receave your letters, specially when they do 
bring us good tidings. 

Yesterday in the morninge we had letters from Diep, dated the 20th of this 
moneth, contayninge a heape of good newes, as of the fight betwixt Ivetott 
and Osbocke, wherin was 16 "^ of the enemies slaine ; that both the Duke de 
Mayne and Guise had ben taken prisoners but both rescued ; the Duke of 

Guyses or slaine, and so the Duke escaped ; that the Duke of Parma 

was intrenched in a woode, that his vitteills were in comparison to yours 
dearrer by 20 for one. Att the same time came a letter from the French 
Kinge, dated the 18th or 28th, to his Ambassador, wherin he made mention of 
his forcinge of the Duke of Guise and de Mayne from ther quarter to the 
Duke of Parmas campe with losse, and takinge of 80 or 100 of his enemies, 
amongst the which he named the Governors soneOrleance, andoneCountsna,[?] 
a leader of horsemen. And now this morninge came your letters of the 21th 
of Aprill, by which you have greatly satisfyed her Majestic with so many par- 
ticularityes as therby the trewth may be best knowen. For many times 
Otwell Smyth is hasty in hearinge, light in beleevinge, and as soodayne in 
writinge ; but untill yours doe come, I doe not make certaine advertisements, 
yet when they are good they doe not offend us, only when they doe not prove 
trewe, they make us doubt of the next. 

Her Majestic hath resolved to yeald to your revocation which, in respect of 
your excessive burthen, is most right ; but yet I wishe you to byde this end 
which I hope in Godes goodnesse will prove comfortably for you to report ; 
for in very truth upon the event of this present accident dependeth salus nostrte 
reipubliccB et totius Christiani orbis prqfitentis vere Christum. We here are 



432 [April, 

dilligent in publicke prayers, and none more devoute then the Queenes Majes- 
tic for your prosperitie there. And so with an evill hand I end rudely, but 
hartely, with my comendations. 

From the Cort at Greenewich, 25 Aprill, 1592. 

Your Lordships most assuredly, 

William Burghley. 

To my honorable good freinde. Sir Henry Unton, Knight, 
her Majesties Ambassador in Fraunce. 



CCXXXII. 

1592, 

26 Apr. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by a servant of 

Sir Roger Williams. " i 

My very good Lord. I have ben all this night in armes with the Kinge, of 
the which great toyle not findinge myselfe well disposed, I beseech your Lord- 
ship therfore to hold me excused that at this tyrae I use the hande of my 
Secretarye. 

These fewe lines are only to advertise your Lordship that the Duke of Parma 
is nowe dislodginge, and taketh the way to Roan ; the Kinge was in armes all 
night, expectinge that he would have enterprised somethinge upon some of his 
quarters, but he made no kinde of offer that way. The Kinge is presently re- 
movinge with him, with purpose to fight with him either in his marche or in 
his loginge, before he have comoditie to entrenche himselfe. The enemie was 
never in the like feare as he is nowe reduced, as appereth by his dislodginge, 
which he made this night by stealth, without sound either of the drom or 
trompet, to his very great dishonor in the opinion of all men of warr. 

The Kinge doth goe before with 1,000 horse to take vewe of his march and 
to amuse him therin, advancinge likewise his army after him with all dilUgence, 
which I hope will worke some great effect ; and he is resolute to use aU meanes 
to force him to fight. 

' The original of this letter is in the State Paper Office. 



A. D. 1592.] 433 

I most humbly thancke herMajestie for her gratious care of me in assen- 
tinge to my retoume. And where your Lordship signifieth that her Highnesse 
referreth the time therof to my discretion, I will alwayes so measiu-e my par- 
ticular as shalbe with a more dewe regard of her Majesties service, as becometh 
me, though the conservacion of my poore estate doe depend theron. But for 
that this great action wiU nowe within fewe dales be at an end one way or 
other, after the which I may be well spared hence, I humbly beseech your 
good Lordship to be pleased to send me away my letters of revocation, for 
the which your Lordship shaU bynd me to pray for you all my life. And so 
I humbly take my leave. 

From Varqueville, the 20th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your lordships humbly to command, 

Henry Unton. 

The Kinge is advertised that the Count Soissons 
hath not married his sister, as he was formerly 
given to understand, but that the gentlemen of the 
contrey of these partes did impeach the same, for 
that the Count brought no letter from the Kinge of 
his allowance and likinge therof; so as he is 
retourned with great shame of no better succeed- 
inge. 



ccxxxin. 



1592, 

29 Apr. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved the 10th of May, 

by John Symons. " 

My lord Ambassador, I have no leasure att this present to write unto you 
of any other matter then only to give you imderstandinge of her Majesties 
assent, att the motion of the French Kings Ambassador, that her forces 
ther under the leadinge of Sir Roger Williams shall be continewed for some 

K K K 



434 [May, 

longer time, with hope to see some happy event of theise actions nowe 
in hand ; herof her pleasure is you should give knowledge to the Kinge. And 
as much by my private letters have I signified to Sir Roger WiUiams. And so 
in haste I comend me to you. 

From my howse in the Strande, this 29th of Aprill, 1592. 

Your assured lovinge freinde, 

William Bubgley. 

The French Kinge might do well to 
enquire of the states of the Lowe Gentries 
some further ayde of men, as her Majes- 
tic hath moved them very earnestly 
therto ; but we heare that Bouzenuall is 
no furtherer herof, for pleasinge of the 
Count Moryer, who alloweth not herof. 



CCXXXIV. 



1592, 

1 May. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Muschy." ^ 

My very good Lord. The Duke of Parma had not marched the 26th, 
a league, when his army tooke a very great alarum, and ther made stale, send- 
inge some horse and foote to skirmishe with us and playinge upon us 
with three peces of cannon, which he had placed in his riereward, the better to 
make his retraict. In the mean season he had the choice of a fitt seate for his 
army and incamped, wher he hath continewed ever sence, fortefinge the place 
very strongly. 

If the Kinge had ben assured what way the Duke of Parma tooke, so as he 
might have followed him with his whole army, the enemie must needs have 
bene defeated in this march. That night the Kinge loged at this towne, and 
his army in the villages about, it beinge a league vidth in the Duke of Parmas 
campe, and nearer unto it then Varqueville. 

' The draft of this letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 382. 



A. D. 1592.] 435 

It was advertised the Kinge that the Duke of Parma intended by stealthe 
to gaine Roan, and from thence to Neufchastell, that he might passe over 
Pont Dormy and retoume ; but perceavinge the Kinge to persue him 
with soche diligence, he was forced to retire towards Caudebec, where for want 
of a bridge, he resolved to passe over in boates, havinge gathered to gether all 
the boates of Roan, wherof some may conteine 100 horse ; but the weather 
hath ben so tempestuos, as they could not as yett passe over many, yett doe 
they passe over some dayly, and as we conceave, use all diUigence to passe OA'er 
the rest, intendinge to make their retraict by Paris, which the Kinge will pre- 
vent with passinge his army over at Pont de I'Arch to make head against them, 
and to cutt of their passage, or to force them to fight. 

Villars, with horse and foote and 3 peces of artillerie, is gone to take 
Kilbeufe, which the Kinge began to fortefie, but to late, and is not finished. 
It is feared it is taken, and then cannot the shippes continewe in the river with 
safety, so as the river wilbe cleared, and the enemies army therby plentifully 
victualled. Then vnH. they temporise, and force our armie either to breake or 
retire for want of victuall, for we have no forrage nor any victuall but what com- 
eth from Deip and St Vallery by wagon and mules with very stronge convoyes, 
wherof much is dayely intercepted by the garrison of Feckham and Newf- 
chastell. This is our greatest feare, and not without cause. 

Our army is much harried, and many do dayly disband for want of money 
and victualls. The Kinge doth daylie imploy them in action. The enemies 
camp is more harried then ours, for that they incampe in the open feild, 
and worse wheather ther hath not ben sene in winter then of late ; which 
causeth theirs to fall sicke and disband in a manner by troupes, both French 
and Spaniardes, that it is thought the Duke of Parma is not above 8,000 foote 
stronge, and most of the French have quitted him. 

Yesterday the Kinge assembled early in the mominge 1,000 Englishe, 
as many Scotts and Netherlands, 800 Lansquenetts, 1,500 Swisses, 2,000 
French shott, 1,500 French Cuirasses and as many Reyters, and caused 
3 smale peeces of artillerie to march with them. The rest, bothe horse and 
foote, ensignes and cornetts, with the baggage, were left at ther quarter 
of those troups so assembled. The Kinge gave the leadinge of 200 Cuirasses 
and as many Reiters and 300 shott to the Baron of Biron, and 1,500 French 
shott to Grillon to followe him. Sir Roger Williams was appointed to seconde 
him with 200 Englishe and 400 Scottishe and Netherlands ; the Marshall 



436 [May, 

D'Aumont with 300 Cuirasses ; the rest of the forces remayned with the 
Kinge for their retraict. The Barron Biron, the Marshall D'Omont and 
BouUon, with the former troupes, were comanded to give into the quarter 
where the Duke of Parmas horse were loged, and to defeat them, to take 
spoile of their baggage and burne ther quarter, which they accordingly per- 
formed; but the Barons over-hastines, who entred the quarter with the 
troupes before the rest could come to second him, and the greedinesse of the 
souldiers to spoile, hindred the performance of the enterprise, and was the 
occasion that the enemy escaped, and that fewe of them were killed. And 
hadd not Sir Roger Williams with his 200 Englishe withstood the enemy 
the better, the Baron with his companies, and the Marshall D'Amont, had 
ben overthrowen ; but God gave them very good successe, for the enemie 
wanted courage, and our men forced the quarter, killinge 150, takinge the 
spoile of 500 wagons, and all the baggage, and brought away 1000 horse of all 
sortes, arid as much spoile as was worth 50,000 •=. att the least. This I 
speake of my owne knowledge, beinge present with the Kinge at the saied ser- 
vice. The rest of the quarter and spoiles our men sett on fier, and then retired 
without losse, only the Marshall D'Amont his sonne is shott, and Capten 
Edward Power, who are bothe in danger. Capten Power and St John served 
well, and Sir Roger Williams with greate hazard and honor. In the quarter of 
the enemie so forced ther was the 7 companies of ordonnance, 21 companies 
of hght horse, 5 companies of Carabines, and ther Reyters. Thesewere defeated ; 
most of their horses of baggage and service taken, and 4 cometts. The attempte 
was most desperate, and resolved by the Kinge to force the enemye to fight, 
which nothinge can worke. The place was very stronge by nature, havinge 
greate valleys, woodes and marshes, and neare unto the towne of Caudebec and 
the river, besides their intrenchment. This sheweth the Kinges resolution to 
fight and the enemies feare and resolution ; but God is the only giver of 
victorie. Who (the place considered) did miracxilosly preserve ours, contrary to 
the opinion of men of warr, and with lesse losse then was expected. This 
good successe dothe gaine the Kinge great honor, and dothe as much incorage 
his men, as it dothe discomfort the enemie. 

The Kinge hath so much over-wearied himselfe with continuall travaile as 
he hath gotten an ague, with which his good successe is somewhat dimished. 
Myselfe with the like travaile have had a fitt of an ague all this night, which 
yett hath not -lefte me. 



A. D. 1592.] 437 

This day we dislodge and retier more towards Dieppe a league, leavinge the 
greatest parte of our army to make head to the enemy. The Kinge is forced 
so to doe to have the better comoditie of victuell ; and as the Duke of Parma 
riseth, he will advance forwards and attend uppon him, resolvinge to fight with 
him in his march. 

The Duke of Parma is very weake and ill of his hart, and carried upp and 
downe the campe by men, not beinge able to ride, which dothe greatley discom- 
fort his array, comitting all the charge to La Motte. 

Conceminge my particular, I am humbly to entreat your Lordship to send 
me her Majesties letter for my retourne, wherunto it hath pleased the Kinge 
to assent. It importeth me very greately, and by that tyme I receave it, these 
two armies wilbe seperated ; for one of them must needs break, if they fight 
not. I humbly crave pardon for my ragged writinge, wantinge bothe leisure 
and healthe to write as I would. So in all hast I most humbly take my 
leave. 

From Ivetot, this first of May, 1592. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Hen'ry Untox. 
This bearrer hath escaped very hardley, 
and was in greate danger. I can finde 
none of the posts that hazard so much 
as himselfe ; wherof I beseech your Lord- 
ship to have consideration. 



ccxxxv. 



1592, 

4 May. " From her Majestic ; receaved the 23th of May, by 

my Servant Jonas." 

ELIZABETH R. 

Trustie and right well beloved, we greet you well. Havinge ben made ac- 
quainted with soch causes concerninge your private estate, as have moved 



438 [May, 

you to crave licence to retome home for a tyme, we have ben pleased to assent 
therunto. And so we doe hereby give you leave and warrant, after the receipt 
of these our letters, att your best comoditie to take your leave of the Kinge, 
(to whom we have also written our letters, signiiyinge this our lycence graunted 
you, and prayinge him to like well therof,) and then to make your repaire 
hether as soone as conveniently you may, leavinge behinde you your Secretary 
to attend the Kinge, and to advertise us from tyme to tyme of soch things as 
shall fall out ther meet to be made knowen to us, or as the Kinge shall 
give him direction to doe. And this our letters shalbe your sufficient warrant 
and discharge in that behalfe. 

Gyven under our signett, att our mannor of Grenewich, this fourth of May, 
in the 34th yeare of our raigne. 



CCXXXVI. 



1592, 

4 May. " From Sir Robert Cecill ; by my Servant Jonas, receaved 
the 23th of May, at Compeigne." i 

Sir, If 2 you should receave by me any newes of other matters at this tyme 
I knowe you would not neade them. I doe heare much newes, and I will 
reserve them till we may meet in our wonted conferences, which I thincke we 
shall, if your French lyfe have not altered your Englishe faithe or marred that 
profession which, before your goinge, of your owne good nature you beleeved 
in. If you beleeve whisperers base and conninge, of which till within this 4 
dales I never hadd reason to mistrust, you are not the man I tooke you 
for when we parted. 

This letter I would have sent 2 dayes sence, by the computation of your last 
defeat on Monday ; they were signed even that day in the afternoone. Yes- 
terday your importunate solUcitor Clyfford missed me, or els he had had them 
with in an hower after. I thincke he is rune madd for joy ; he is worth the 

' The original letter is preserved in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 369. 
^ Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 439 

havinge, I assure you. Soe as gladd as yourselfe, I leave you to God. From 
the Corte, this 4th of May, 1592. 

Sence I began to write this letter your dispatch came. For your retourne 
the Queene leaves it to your discretion when you thinck good, and so hath 
willed me to say to you. 

Your lovinge freind, 

Robert Cecill. 

To my honorable and lovinge freind, 
Sir Henry Unton, Knight, her Majes- 
ties Abassador with the French Kinge. 



CCXXXVII. 



1592, 

5 May. " To my honorable good freind. Sir Henry Umpton, 
Knight, Ambasador for her Majestic with the 
Frenche Kinge." ' 



. . . knowlege of the Kynges sykenes and yo 
have pleased me moch the better. The whils 
fevers grewe, by over heatyng your bodyes in th 
servyce, I am in good hope by your next letters to b . 
satysfyhed in that poynte. 

That you wrote to my Lord Threasurer with a letter from s 
to my Lords came to my handes by 7 of the clocke up o 
sent to me by my Lord Threasurer hether, which I presently 
Majesty, who was exceedyngly well pleased with the 
thanked God for the succes. My hope is good that h 
will renforse the Englysh bandes w"". 2,000 men 
which I wysh wear 4,000. 

Your retume, as yt is graunted, so ther is order gyven 
' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 525. 



440 [May, 

which by the receyte of these I trust you shall fynd. So be 

overbusyed by sodayn occasyon, I must (with the best tha . . . . 

can gyve you for your letters) I leave you to the protectyon of . . . 

commendyng me most hartely unto you. From the Courte, 

this v*. of May, 1592. 

Your assured frend, 

T. Heneage. 



CCXXXVIII. 



1592, 

5 May. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Rezeirs. " ^ 

My very good Lord. The Duke of Parma passed over the river at Caude- 
beck the rest of his army and artillerie uppon Wedensday last. That day he 
marched away ^ towards Roan, leavinge his artillerie at the water side strongly 
intrenched and well garded, to make his retraict, and to impeach the passage of 
our shipes and landinge of forces ther to followe them. His cavallerie he sent 
by land to Roan, and burned very many of his wagons which wanted horse, as 
also the boates that transported him. Att the last he Tsdthdrewe the cannon, 
and lefte 150 Spaniardes and 50 Wallons within Caudebec for the defenc of 
it; as also [he] was forced to leave some munition and horses belonginge 
to his artillery in the towne. His cavaUerie and armie joyne together againe 
at Roan, where it is thought they have mett, for he used very great dilligence 
in his march, and retired with feare and dishonor. 

Before the enemie had withdrawen their artillery, the Kinge invested Caude- 
bec, and played uppon them with five peeces of cannon, which he brought 
with him to batter Caudebec, so as he killed some of ther men and horses 
in their retiringe of their cannon. Assone as they were retired, the Kinge 
sommoned Caudebec to yeald, which they then utterly refused, wheruppon the 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; a copy in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 275. 
■which in the catalogue is erroneously ascribed to the 5 March. 
2 Here is the heginning of the Cottonian MS. 



A.D.I 592.] 441 

Kinge resolved the next day to batter it, and to take it by composition or 
assault. The Kinge accordingly planted his cannon for the battery, and 
comanded the shippes with their artillery to play uppon the towne ; they had 
not made many shott before the enemy desired to parlye, which was granted 
them, wherin much time was lost and nothinge effected, they of the towne 
refusinge to yeald with out cariage away of ther munition, and horses of 
artillerie, best in the towne. Yt was then to late to continew the batterye, and 
therfore the Kinge deferred it untill the mominge ; when as the towne rendred 
after a fewe shott, departinge with their armes, ensignes displayed and sound 
of dromme, but without their munition. 

It was advertised that the Duke of Parma useth aU meanes to repasse 
his army at Roan, either to continewe to make warres in Base Normandye 
with the ayd of the Kinge of Spaines forces in Bryttaine, which he expecteth ; 
or els to retourne into the Lowe Contrey the nearest way by Newf-chastell and 
over the river of Some. The latter is most probable, and of the former the 
better sorte have no opinion. This advertisement dothe very much trouble 
the Kinge, who hath taken resolution to seperate his army in two partes, 
leavinge the one with the Marshall Biron, and conductinge the other himselfe, 
wherwith he marcheth to morrowe to Pont de I'Arch, intendinge ther to attend 
the enemie untill he march, and if he take the way of Paris to retourne to cutt 
of his victuals and to attempte somewhat uppon every fitt occasion ; and if he 
retourne by NeufchasteU, to joyne againe with the Marshall Biron, and to 
force him to fight, and to incomidate the Duke of Parma in his passage. In 
the meane season the Marshall shall beseige L'Islebone, Feckam, and soch 
other places, to clear the contrey, and therby to blocke Roan. 

Kilbeuf uppon the river of Seine shall also be strongly fortefied, a place of 
very greate importance to comand the river and to blocke Roan, as also another 
place upon the river nere Newhaven shalbe presently fortefied, from whence 
Newhaven fetcheth all her fresh water ; wherby bothe Newhaven and Roan 
wilbe so incomodated as the Kinge is perswaded they cannott longe hold out 
and wilbe brought into greate extremitie. If the Duke of Parma had taken 
Kilbeufe, all the Kinges hope of Roan had ben loste, and her Majesties 
shippes in danger. The Blinge desireth they may stale the fortefyinge 
of Kilbeuf, but I imagine they may well be spared ; and I conceave noe greate 
hope of Roan by reason of the faction of the Kinges best coxmseUors. 

Gryllon, by the meanes of his brother, treateth nowe with the Kinge 

L L L 



442 [May, 

to hould his goverment for the Kings service, and it is in a manner accorded, 
so as the Kinge dothe assure himselfe that Gryllon will shortely hould for him, 
which will greately advance the Kings service. 

The Duke of Parmas ague doth yett hould him and hath brought him very 
lowe ; and the Duke De Mayne lieth at Roan very sicke of the French disease. 
They do very ill agree, and the Duke of Guise dothe very much complaine of 
the Duke of Mayne and of the Duke of Parma in his letters to his mother, 
which the Kinge intercepted ; he complayneth of the Duke of Parmas wante 
of corage and coolde proceedinge to his dishonor, and so do the French 
leaguers. The Duke of Parma and his forces of the Lowe contreis doe as much 
complaine of the disloaUty and treacherie of the Duke of Mayne and the 
French. This is very credibly reported and the Kinge doth use all meanes 
underhand to norishe these conceits in them bothe. 

The Count Soissons and the Kings sister are not yett married, but very 
greate affection is betwixt them. They have bothe severally written and sent 
to the Kinge to obtaine his good will. And wheras the opinion was that they 
were married at a Masse, yt was grounded uppon their famiharytie, and the 
Count Soissons owne report to a private freind of his for his glory, but it is 
now manifested that she would not marrie him but after her religion, wherunto 
he willingly assented, and theruppon used all intreatie to the ministers of the 
contrey of Bearne to contract them, which they refused. Then he would have 
forced a minister therunto, which beinge published, the contrey did take armes 
against him and force him to departe, wherwith the Kings sister was very 
much greived. The Count Soissons did earnestly request to borrow 15,000 
crownes of Monsr. Espemon, but he could obteyne but 1500 crownes of 
him. 

Since my last dispatch my ague hathe not lefte me, notwithstandinge I will 
attend the Kinge in this jomey to Pont de TAxch, where I may remayne if I 
have noe better helth, and doe dayly expect her Majesties gratious letters for 
my retoume. Thus leavinge furder to trouble your Lordship att this tyme, I 
moste humbly take my leave. 

From the Campe at Langtot, within 2 leagues of Caudebec, this 5th of 
May, 1592. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Henkt Unton. 



A. D. 1592.] 443 

For want of postes I am forced to send 
this bearrer my Secretary, who hatha done 
me good service, and heretofore did in 
your Lordships house attend uppon my 
Lady Vere, whom he instructed in the 
French, and therfore was the more 
desirous to doe his duty to your Lord- 
ship and to her Ladyship with this oc- 
casion. 



CCXXXIX. 

1592, 

6 May. "To Capten George Fenn ... to any other 

Capteine of her Majesties . . .as 

it may aperteine. " ' 



Knight her Majesties Ambassadour in France .... 

order sent for to retorne into England ..... 

are therefore to require you, and every of ..... . 

the sight heereof to make your most s ...... . 

to Diep, and to bringe him over in y . 

in such sorte as yf I weare theare my se ..... . 

his safetie, and for any favoure you cann ...... 

him. Soe fare ye well. From the ........ 

Grenewhich, this vj"*. day of Maye, 159 

Your lovinge freind, 

C. Howard. 
6'". May 1592. 

My Lord Admirals warrant 

for a ship. 

Whether this letter be not to be entered 

with the letters of revocation receaved the 

23 of May, quaere. 

' From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 517. 



444 [May, 



CCLX. 



1592, 

7 May. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Cole, from 

Motteville. " ' 

My very good Lord. The Kings last resolution of seperatinge his army 
in two partes, wherof by my last I did advertise your Lordship, is nowe altered 
by reason of the contrary advertisement of the enemies designes, who intend to 
retourne into the Lowe ^ Countreis by Paris, and to passe by Dreux and 
Verneul. It is thought they will in their retoume beseige Vernon or Evreux. 
They have lefte ther Swisses in garrison in Roan, and the rest of their army 
and cavaUerie have passed on the further side of the river at Roan to joyne 
together, marchinge with aU dUligence towards Dreux. The Duke de Mayne 
remaineth very sick in Roan. 

This course of the Duke of Parma doth directe the Kinge, who is forced to 
alter his resolutions with the enemies, and therfore resolveth nowe to march 
with his whole army towards the Duke of Parma, to succor his townes, if the 
other attempte any of them ; or if he retourne by Paris the Kinge will attend 
him to the frontiers, and passe by St Denis, to incomodate ther army and to 
force the Duke of Parma to fight, if it be possible. 

Yesterday the Kings army marched together, and loged at this village and 
about it ; himselfe goeth this day before with 200 horse to loge att Ponte de 1' 
Arch. His cornett and French cavallery march to Claville, within 5 leagues of 
Pont de I'Arch conducted by the Duke Montpensier, and Marshall Biron 
marcheth within two leagues of Claville. The cornett with his French 
cavaUerie shall joyne with the Kinge tomorrowe j the Marshall Biron with 
the army shall joyne with them bothe the nexte day, they beinge not able with 
the infanterie to march so faste as the cavellery ; and the Kinge marched 
this day 12 leagues, the cornett with the French horse 7 leagues, and the 
rest of the army 5 leagues. This course the Kinge taketh to use the more 

1 The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; the copy in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. 
fol. 375. 

^ Here begins the copy in the Cottonian volume. 



A. D. 1592.] 445 

dUligence to overtake the enemies, and to discover what becometh of the enemie, 
that he may direct his army accordingly. 

The towne of Loviers failed surprisinge within these 2 dales by the enemie, 
who by intelligence with some in the towne and by scalado did attempte it, and 
had almoste effected their enterprises. Those townes the Kinge possesseth he 
keepeth only by force ; for the common people are superstitious Leaguers and 
traytors to him. 

The Governor of L'Islebonne treateth with the Kinge to yeald the gover- 
ment into his hands by composition, which it is thought wilbe effected and 
may benefitt the Kinge greately. Also very greate hope is conceaved that 
Honfleur and Tanquerville will hold for the Kinge, wherof Grillon is gover- 
nor. 

It is bruted here that the French Queene is dead, which the Kinge himselfe 
reporteth with no greife. He is so advertised by Monsr. de Plessys, and that 
the governor of the place wher shee remaineth doth hould for the Kinge, yet 
many doe not beleive it. He doth also advertise greate hope of pease, wherof 
he treated with Villery by allowance of Monsieur de Mayne, but the wiser 
sorte doe dispaire therof. 

The Duke of Lorrayne hath taken Coifiy in Champanny and Montagny, by 
composition ; hee battered them bothe with 1 5 peeces of battery, he nowe 
marcheth towards Chasteau Villain, and taketh his tyme in the absence of the 
Kinges forces. This is as much as I can leame worthy of your Lordships 
knowledge, and I feare I shall want meanes in this postinge jomey to advertise 
your Lordship of our proceedinge ; notwithstandinge I will doe [my] best, 
and so I most humbhe take my leave. 

From Motteville, this 7th of May, 1592. 

Your Lordships ever to comand, 

Hexry Unton. 



446 [May, 



CCXLI. 

1592, 

9 May. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by Jasper, the Post." ^ 

My very good Lord. This morninge the governor of Evreux doth adver- 
tise the Kinge that he hath defeated many Spaniards that entred the suburbs 
of the towne '^to burne them, wherin they were repulsed, and 40 or 50 of them 
lefte dead in the place, besides many hurte ; the rest he pursued, takinge diverse 
of them prisoners. He advertiseth that the Duke of Parma taketh the direct 
way to Paris and marcheth with all possible dilligence ; intendinge there to 
passe over the river, from thence to Meaux, and so by Soissons into the Lowe 
Contries. Also he reporteth that they march with greate feare very disorder- 
ly, leavinge their sicke and hurte men behind them, whom the pesents killed ; 
and many others disbanded dayly for wante and feare, so as his army groweth 
very weake. His Swisses and Spaniards that were in Caudebec, he hath left 
in garrison in Roan, wher Monsr. De Mayne contineweth very sick. This 
dishonorable retraict doth greately diminish his reputation amongest the French 
Leaguers, and his invincible army wilbe no more feared. God hath Himselfe 
defeated more of them by famine and sicknesse then the Kinge by the sworde ; 
and if the Kinge had not amused himselfe uppon Caudebec, but imediatly 
passed the river with his army, (I dare confidently speak it,) they had ben all 
overthro wen, they were so much discouraged and daunted, takinge continuall 
alarums. This ther owne doe reporte, to ther dishonor. 

The Kinge marcheth with his whole army after the Duke of Parma, but he 
maketh so great haste as I have no hope our company can overtake them ; 
wherfore I feare the Kinge wilbe forced only to foUowe him with his cavallery, 
and so may he once more take veiwe of the enemies march, and uppon fitt 
occasion cutt of some of them and conduct them out of his frontiers. This is 
as much, in my opinion, as the Kinge can performe. 

It is feared that the Duke of Parma hath some practis in hand at Paris to 
assure the towne for his master, and meaneth to take advantage of the Duke 

' The original letter is in the State Paper Office ; a copy In the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 377. 
' Here is the commencement of the Cottonian copy. 



A. D. 1592.] 447 

of Maynes absence and sicknesse ; he carrieth the Duke of Guise with him, as 
it is thought to that purpose ; makinge very greate oflfers to him if it take effect. 
Herof the Duke de Mayne is in jelousy ; which he preventeth as much as he 
may underhand, fearinge the Duke of Guyses tractable hiimor and desire to 
make himselfe great. 

The Kinges nobihtie doe very much presse the Kinge for leave to retourne, 
they can by no meanes be longer staled ; wheruppon the Kinge assembleth his 
counsell to morrowe at Buhy to take resolution howe to imploy his army and 
in what manner he may followe the Duke of Parma, and then he promiseth to 
licence his nobiUitie to departe. His whole army wiU break if he harry them 
in this journey, and his best counsellors doe advise him to leave his army 
behinde to beseige townes in Nonnandi, and so to block Roan afarr of, which 
is in great extremitie for want of victuaUs. 

To beseech Roan againe the Kinge will want meanes, neither is he able to 
make it good ; his Reyters mutine for wante of pay, and (as I fear) will not 
longe be retained, for the Kinge wanteth money to satisfye them. The 
Englishe are so weake as they marche not 800, and disband dayly. The 
Nether Landers are in the like state. 

So leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, beinge glad of any oppor- 
tunitie to let your Lordship knowe what becometh bothe of the enemy and us, 
accordinge to your expectation and my dewty, I most humbly take my leave. 

From Pont St Pierre, this 9th of May, 1592. 

Your Lordship to comand, 

Henbt Unton. 



CCXLIL 
1592, 
10 May. From Sir Henry Unton to ' 

same to let you knowe, that he eamestlie 

' From the original in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. yiii. fol. 379. 



448 



[May, 



before Newhaven the space of fifteene dai . 
enimies deffering, who, as he is advertised, is pre 
certeine shippes cute of Bryttaine to Newhaven, as well 
as also to hinder the Kinges presennt fortefyinge 
take the same. This he hath praide me to . 
you, which if yt do not swarve from your instructions 
to do, otherwise you best knowe in your owne disc 
your instructions do lymmitt and directt you, to the 
you. I have also moved the 

conceminge your sendinge more shippes upp into the 
Sene, which he thincketh needlesse, but that you o 
the course before prescribed. For matter of m 
nott leisure at this time to writt unto you . 
but in gennerall you shall knowe that the Pa . 
with his cavaUarie to followe the Duke of . 
the frontiers of the Low Contries, and le 
armie behinde him under the conduct of . . . 
Byron to take NewchatteU, and the other 
of Normandie. And so I committ you to Go . 
Campe at Bhuy, the 10th of May, 1592. 

Your lovinge frend, 

Henry Unton. 



1592, 
11 May. 



CCXLIII. 

From Sir Henry Unton to Sir Thomas Wilkes. &gt; 



regard of her in soUicitinge th . 
to her Majestic, whereof he much marvelleth 
nothing from you, and what effectes his . 

• From the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol, 384. 



A, D. 1592.] 



449 



take place, and doth 



letter did wourke in her Majestic and your rep 
that he comitted to your charge. He doth mor 
longe for answeare, and saieth that her Majestie 
pecteth both you and me to be French, but he f 
us both to be much Englishe. I assure you he 
marvells in Testa(?), and condemneth us both . 
whom he comitted so waightie a matter, h . 
wiU he not deale by anie other then one of 
and therefore recomendeth the more feeling care 
his extraordinarie affection once more into our 
handes, wherein I praie you lett somewhatt 
donne for pittye. 

He abjureth his love to all others, if this mo 
so importune me with his . . . discourses of his affection, as it doth 
wearie me, espetiallie because her Majestie geiveth no eare thereunto. He 
threatneth that nothing shall stey him from coming into England within a 
mon . . . and imediatelie uppon his retourne out of Pycardie ; and con- 
jureth me that I shall not lett her Majestie knowe so much, for that he will 
steale from hence seacretlie, and goe with verie fe . . . unknowne, under 
the couler of an ambassador sent from himself to her Majestie. He requesteth 
ray sta ... so longe to be his guyde, and desireth you to meete him at 
the sea side, that he male know whether his coming wilbe gratefuU. 

When I remember howe dangerous PhilUpp Comynes maketh the enter- 
viewe of Princes, then doe I feare to be author of this ; but againe I consider 
that he meant it not by a King and a Queene, spetiaUie betweene twoe so rare 
creatures; and this Kinges extraordinarie affection doth greatlie blynd my 
judgement in that pointe when pictures and reporte make such impression in a 
Kinge, what encrease her rare guiftes and presence will doe, jude you ; for I 
doe alreadie apprehend it. 

The Kinge would have twoe shippes staled of those that be here, to carrie 
him over, and comandeth me to handle the matter so as it male be geven out 
to be for my retourne, and his ambassador to accompanie me. I dare not for 
my lief, but .... praying you to imparte ..... 

to her Majestie alone, whom the know 

of her counsell, and with all speede to direct me accordinglie, and to send me 
some answeare, whereof the poore King male have comforte. He carrieth me 

M M M 



450 [May, 

with him this posting journey, and speaketh of nothing to me but of his journey 
into England, which he saieth nothing shall alter, and of his affection. This 
is the onlie cause of my favour with him. 

I have not written at all unto her Majestie of this matter for twoe respectes ; 
first, because my letters to her Highnes are stoUen sometimes out of her 
pockett and from such place where they are left, and so deskanted to my pre- 
judice; then for that I dare not comitt so waightie a matter to a letter, not 
knowing whatt effect your former reporte hath had, and fearing misconstruction 
of my dutifull meaning. But your discreation male use what is best, and im- 
parte by speech better then letters can reporte, wherein the King hath before 
used you and trusted you, and yourself have ben a witnes. 

So in hast I end, with my hartie comendacons. 

From Bhuy, this 11th of May, 1592. 

Your verie assured frend, 

This bearer is ignorant of what this H. U. 

letter mentioneth, and I praie you lett it 
be concealed from all the world but her 
Majestie. 

11th May 1592. 
To Sir Tho. Wylkes. 



CCXLIV. 

1592, 

1 1 May. " To the lord Threasurer ; by Mr. Harte, from Busy. " ' 

My very good Lord. Your Lordships letters of the 25th and 29th of Aprill 
I receaved the 10th of this moneth, beinge very glad to perceave by them 
that her Majestie and your Lordship doe allowe of my rawe service and adver- 
tisements, which dothe not a litteH comforte and incorage me ; and I do 
hould myselfe moste happy when my service heare may bringe forth anythinge 
worthy her gratious conceat, or that her Highnesse (of her meere goodnesse 
without any merritt of myne,) is pleased to conceave well of my dewtiMl 
raynde and desier to doe her service, wherin I wiU never faile duringe life ; 
and I doe most humbly acknowledge her Majesties goodnesse in yealdinge to 
' The original letter is in the State Paper Office, the draft is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 380. 



A. D. 1592.] 451 

my revocation, which I crave of your Lordship to furder, for that importeth 
me in my poore estate very much, and I shalbe the better able herafter 
to serve her Majestie, wheras nowe ther wilbe no greate use of my service 
here in respect of the Duke of Parmas retoume and the ende of our greatest 
warres for this tyme. 

The Kinge hath taken resolution with his coimsell to followe the Duke of 
Parma with 1,000 French Cuyrasses, and many Harquebusiers on horsebacke. 
The rest of his army he leaveth with the Marshall Biron to goe directly to 
beseige Neufchastell, from thence to Harflue, then to St Valerery and 
Crotteau, to take and fortefie those townes, and therin promiseth to place two 
governors of the Relligion. Afterwards he will take Feckham, and soche 
other places as may blocke Roan afarr of, which (as he is perswaded,) cannot 
longe hould out, especially if Kilbeufe be throughly fortefied, which, as 
it is thought, will within 15 dales be in pregnable and will most incomodate 
Roan. In the meane time he hath comanded Monsr. De Montpensier with 
his cavallerie of Normandy to attend aboute Kilbeufe to impeach the Duke of 
Mayne, who intendeth to beseige it with soche forces as he hath ; knowinge 
the importance of the place. The rest of the Bangs nobility he hath licensed, 
and they are departed. The Kinge saieth he will not stale aboute 20 dales in 
this journey into Picardy, and then retoumeth to joyne with the Marshall 
in Normandi. He desireth the continewance of her Majesties shipes lately 
sent and pynasses untill his retoume, and untill those places be taken, and 
which, as he saieth, will in a moneth be performed ; wherof I doubt some- 
what. Also he complaineth of the decay and disbandinge of our Enghshe 
troupes, of whom he makest most accompte, and would crave the renforcinge 
them ; which I leave to her Majesties dewe consideration and to his owne 
sollicitinge, beinge sorry his requests are so burthensome to her Majestie and 
the State ; as also that the English disband assoone as they come, which 
dothe disappointe the Kinge and putt her Majestie to greater charge, besides 
ther owne shame, wherof I see noe likelyhood of amendement. Ther throates 
are cutt in ther retoume by the enemie and pesants, by 20 and 30 in a 
companie, and ther armes loste by that meanes, and for want of carriadge. 
Roan was never in greater extremitie for victuaUs then at this present, for 
what hath entred the towne sence the raisinge of the seige hath for the moste 
parte ben consumed by the Duke of Parmas army. So they complaine 
greately bothe of the Duke of Parma and the Duke of Mayne, and do 



452 [May, 

urge the Duke of Mayne to beseige Kilbeuf, wherin the Collonells Temple and 
Rebourse are placed with 500 Lancequenets, for the defence therofduringe the 
fortification. 

The Kinge also intendeth to make a forte uppon the mouth of the river of 
Some neare unto St Vallery, to incommodate AbevUle and these partes, 
and to impeach the discent of the Spaniards. The like forces he intendeth to 
make in Brittany upon the mouth of the river of Some and other rivers there, 
as also elsewhere, perswadinge himselfe that it is the best meanes to hinder 
the enemie and to conserve what he possesseth already, as also to increase the 
same. If the States doe send any more forces to the Kinge he then purposeth 
to seperate his army in two parts, and so to take the townes in Normandi, as 
aforesaied, with the more expedition ; other wise his beseeginge of them 
will drawe to the more length. Also he intendeth to burne and spoile all 
the enemies harvest, wherwith they of Roan make accompte to be releived ; so 
by extreme necessitie he hopeth in tyme to force them to composition. 

The Duke of Parma and his army is aboute Paris. They of the towne will 
not suffer his army to enter in to passe over the river, wherfore it is thought 
he is passed over at St Clou in boates, wher the bridge was broken. His 
practise uppon Paris, wherof I did lately advertise your Lordship, as also what 
course he would take in his retourne by Meaux and Soissons, your Lordship 
understandeth by my last. The Kinge goeth from thence towards Beauvois, 
and so next way to Soissons to meet with him. Monsr. De Sonure, governor 
of Tours, hath lately defeated a company of launces of the enemies, havinge 
taken some of them prisoners ; and he doth advertise the Kinge that he hath 
defeated 200 Spaniards on foot, wherof he killed 40 and tooke 60 prisoners. 
He confirmeth ther disorderly and fearfuU retraict, as also the weaknesse 
of ther army ; and that if the Kinge hadd followed them over the river with 
his army, and followed his victory, that they had ben all defeated. The 
like swift march of an army he saieth he hath not ben seen ; they doe not 
attempte any place in ther retourne, but burne and spoile the countrie as they 
passe, which doth much discontent the people. 

It is advertised that the Kinge of Spaine maketh a greate lea^^y of men 
in Germany for Fraunce, and that the Duke of Parma shall retourne, which I 
beleeve will not be effected this yeare ; yet it is credebly soe advertised. 

Monsr. De Plessis came to the Kinge to this place, who assureth him 
of peace and of the facillity therof, as also of the willingnesse of the Dukes de 



A, D. 1592.] 453 

Mayne and de Guise, so ther particulars may be regarded; which they 
respecte more then the pubUcke. They seeme to respecte more the Relligious 
then ther relHgion and ther owne proffitt. He telleth the Kinge that this day 
or tomorrowe Villeroy the father shall come unto the Kinge to give better 
assurance therof ; the Kinge is credulous therin, because he doth very much 
desire it, and is weary of warres and of his wantes to maynteyne them. 
Monsr. De Plessis, to increase his reputation and to continewe the managinge 
therof, dothe give the more hope. The Spaniard is excluded in the treatie, 
and the wiser sorte do not beleeve that this peace can be concluded. 

Monsn De Boullon shall have commission from the Kinge to command in 
Champagne and Burgundy, as Marshall of Fraunce, soche forces as the Kinge 
hathe there, to make warr against the Duke of Lorrayne and to assure those 
frontiers for the Kinge. He shall also have 500 Reytters with him, if they 
stay, which is to be feared. He shortely goeth theither, the rather to impeach 
the Duke of Parmas passage if he retourne into Fraunce. 

The Count Soissons giveth out to the Kinges Ministers in secrett, that her 
Majestic doth offer to entertaine his service underhand, and doth seeke to im- 
ploy him, and offereth him great matters in that respecte. This I receave 
from very good hand, yett wiU not the Kinge take knowledge therof to 
me, neither dare I utter it to him, lest he suspect the party that did imparte 
it to mee, to whom the Kinge did comunicate it and none ells, who is a very 
greate personage ; but he saieth the Kinge dothe not beleeve it, yett dothe the 
Count Soissons affirme it for his owne glory and to serve his toume. I hum- 
bly beseech your Lordship that this matter may remaine with her Majestic 
and your Lordship, and that the French Ambassador may not be acquainted 
therwith, who will imediatly advertise the Kinge, as he did lately againste me in 
the like, lettinge him knowe what I advertised your Lordship lately of the Count 
Soissons marriage at a Masse, and with other soche advertisements, wherwith 
the Kinge did charge me as doinge ill offices. I did but write it as a bruit, 
and I hope socth manner of advertisements shalbe concealed, that I may not 
be the author therof. Bothe he and the Kinges sister have earnestly written 
to the Kinge to have his good will for their marriadge. She protesteth 
she will not marrie him to offend her consience or the Kinge, and hopeth to 
convert him in relligion. The Kinge saieth he will never give his consent to 
their marriage. The Count sheweth his indescretion and bad disposition, 
which the Kinge ever feared, and her Majestie may assure herselfe of his 



454 [May, 

ill devotion to doe her service^ wherof I did longe sence advertise her 
Majestie. 

So leavinge furder to trouble your Lordship, I most humbly take my leave. 
From Buhy (wher we are nowe departinge,) this 11th of May, 1592. 

Your Lordships to com and, 

Henry Unton. 

The Kinge required me to recomend this Gentleman, Mr. Harte, 
to her Majestie, makinge very honorable report of his longe service, 
vallue and sufficiency ; who retoumeth expresly to bestowe his 
time in her Majesties service. I may justly reporte his good carriage 
of himselfe sence my knowledge of him, as also of his valewe and 
desier to doe her Majestie service. The Kinge doth well esteeme him, 
and would be gladd he might receave any favor of her Majestie. 

Monsr. Villery is nowe arrived here at the court, and here is no 
other speech but of peace, which I hardly beleive, consideringe 
the humor and ambition of the Dukes De Mayne and Guise. 



CCXLV. 
1592, 

15 May. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receavedby John De Vigos 
boy, the 11 th Jime, at Diepe. " i 

My Lord Ambassador. I have not much to write unto you, but to let ^ you 
knowe that your two lattest letters commen heither are the one dated at 
Lington within two myles of Caudebeck, the 5th of May, the other from 
Moteville, the 7th of May, By the first you advertised the passage over the 
river at Caudebeck by the Duke of Parma, with the rest of his army, and from 
thence marched towards Roan. By your latter letter you advertised of the 
enemies intention to passe unto the Lowe Contreis by Paris, by the way 

&gt; The original is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 503. 
2 Here begins the original in the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 455 

of Dreaux and Verneil ; and by the same you advertised that the Duke de 
Mayne remained sick in Roan. But since these your letters^ we have hadd 
by reporte from Deip, that the Duke of Parma was passed, with 1 7 ensignes 
of footemen and two companies of horsemen through Normandy, and hadd 
passed by Evreux and Montfort ; and (as by a coppy of a letter written from 
Monsr. Larchant to the Kinge) it was thought he would recover Paris before 
the Kinge could. And sithence also we understand that the Duke of Parma 
was in Roan, sicke. 

Of the trewth of all things I doubtenot but by your next letters to be more 
certainly advertised from you, accountinge merly that ther are letters of yours 
upon the way. And therfore nowe you must thincke we dayly expect newes 
from thence, wherof we doe hope so much, as we do looke by Gods goodnes 
to have some end. And so havinge no other thinge to write, and beinge 
offered the oportunytie of the Ambassadors messenger, ' I could not forbeare 
to accquaint you with the premisses. 

From the Courte, at Greenwich, 15th of May, 1592. 

Your Lordships assured lovinge freind, 

W. BURGHLEY. 



CCXLVI. 



1592, 

16 May. " To the lord Threasurer, by Thomas, the French Cooke." ^ 

My very good Lord. I cannott advertise your Lordship of any good successe 
of this our journey, for that the Kinge and the Duke of Parma have ben as yett 
farr asonder, havinge the river of Marne betweene them, and the Kinge noe ^ 
fitt passage over the same but at Esperne and Challons. The Duke of Parma 
keepeth still on the further side of the river, takinge his way throughe the con- 

• The remainder of the letter is in Lord Burghley's handwriting. 

= The original is in the State Paper Office ; the draft in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 386. 

' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



456 [May, 

trej' of Brye directly to Chasteau Tierry, from thence intendinge to passe by 
Soissonsj which course if he hould we shall shortely meet ; otherwise, we 
shall no sooner passe the river but he will repasse it, and he hath fitt passages 
in many places, whereas we have none but those two of Espeme and Chalons. 
The Duke of Parma entred into Paris, and ther rested himself, but none of 
his forces could be permitted to passe through the towne ; his intended enter- 
prise failed and the towne utterly refused to receave garrison as before. They 
call him The Prince defeated, and complaine of his wante of courage, and re- 
fusall to fight a battaile ; and also of the disorders of his army in burninge and 
spoilinge the contrey. He hath lost his reputation amonge them, and they 
growe weary of warrs. Monsr de Mayne excuseth himselfe and accuseth the 
Duke of Parma, laying all fault uppon him. They bothe parted very much 
discontented, reproachinge each other, and unreconciled ; the comon people 
murmur much and condemne them both. The Duke of Mayne contineweth 
very sicke at Roan, and the Duke of Parma is in danger to loose his arme, or 
his life, and is carried in a brancarde, beinge very sicke. 

The Kinge marcheth this day to Compeigne, from thence towards Soissons, 
attendinge the enemie, and resolute to attempte somewhat uppon his army; he 
is advertised that his forces in Brye assembled together have defeated 800 of 
the enemies army, kiUinge 200 of them. They marche with greate feare and 
disorder, and the pesants of the contrey doe kill dailie manie of them. The 
Duke of Parma hath burned and loste 1,200 of his wagons for wante of horses, 
and because he might retourne with the more dilligence unto the Lowe 
Contreis, whether he maketh the more hast because of his cure and to goe to 
the bathes. 

Monsr. De BouUon, Plessys, Monsr. Do and Beaulieu the secretarie are gone 
to treate with Villeroy the secretary. President Janyn and others, to conclude 
a peace, havinge sufficient commission bothe from the Kinge and the League. 
It is thought that a surcease of armes shall first be accorded, which will greate- 
ly prejudice the Kinge if the peace foUowe not. The necessity of the League 
must force them to become wholly Spanishe or to yeald to the Kinge ; and the 
late advertisement of the Kinge of Spaines dangerous sicknes and weaknesse 
doth increase the Leagues wiUingnes. Here is great hope conceaved of peace, 
wherof I have no opinion, yet was it never so forward. Of the Kinge of 
Spaines sicknesse your Lordship is better advertised then we here ; and of the 



A. D. 1592.] 457 

Marshall Byrons army and proceedings I knowe your Lordship is sufficiently 
informed from Sir Roger Williams, wherfore I moste humbly take my leave. 
From Senlys, this 16th of May, 1592. 

Your Lordships to command, 

Hexky Unton, 



CCXLVn. 



1592, 

19 May. " From the Lord Threasurer ; by John Mussy, receaved 
the 11th of June at Diepe."' 

My lord Ambassador. The good succes of the Kinges late attempte uppon 
the 2 enemies quarter, wherof you advertised us by your last letters of the 
first of this moneth, geveth us good hope to heare from you of some better, to 
the further distressinge of the enemie and his troupes, which we attende every 
hower. Althoughe if that which by reporte have ben within this 3 or 4 dales 
delivered heare by one or two that came from Diepe be trewe, we shall rather 
here of his entyre overthrowe then otherwise. The reporte that is given forthe 
is, that uppon Thursday last he should passe over his newe bridge at Caudebecke, 
wher he was so readely followed by the Bonge as that he had not leisure to 
breake the bridge after him, which the Kinge ga3med, and passed over his 
whole army after hym, takinge first the towne of Caudebeck and another place 
named Lelebonne, wher he defeated 500 or 600 of the enemie. This is the 
substance of the report, which howe trewe it is yourselfe knoweth, and we shall 
certainely understand, I am sure, by your next letters. For the present I have 
no other thinge wherof to write to you, but that I am sure the Ambassador 
will advertise the Kinge of this, that her Majestic hath written her earnest letters 
bothe to the States and the comanders in the Lowe Contries for the spedye 
sendinge to the Kinge 2,000 of her foote, and a band of a hundred horse, which 

' The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 501. 
- Here is the beginning of the original in the Cottonian MS. 

NN N 



458 [May, 

may be more spedelie sent from thence, and of better souldiers than ther can 
be levyed and transported out of this realme. 

And so havinge no leisure at this tyme to wrjrte at more length unto you, 
I commend me hartely to you. From the Court, this 19th of May, 1592. 

Your assured lovinge freinde, 

W. BUBGLEY. 



CCXLVIII. 

1592, 

21 May. "From the Lords of the Counsell; received 

the 8th of June."! 

After our hartye comendations to your Lordship. Wheras ther hatha bene 
formerly delivered out of the shipp of Flushinge, remayninge presently ther 
in the Kings service, divers peeces of ordinances, munition, and other things 
conteyned in a schedule herinclosed, for the better "^ furtherance of the service 
of the Kinge ; wee have tiiought good, the matter beinge of good valewe, to 
pray and require you imediatly uppon the sight herof, by meanes of the Mar- 
shall Byron or by any other good meanes, to procure the saied ordnance and 
munition to be forthwith delivered backe to be putt in her Majesties shippes 
nowe ther ; or in case they shall be absent, to deliver the same into the saffe 
custody of Otewell Smith, by inventory indented, to be answerable therfore 
when need shall require ; to whom we have accordingly written to take care 
therof. And so not doubtinge of your dewe performance of the premisses, we 
bid you hartely farewell. 

From the Court at Greenwich, this 21 of May, 1592. 

Your lovinge freindes, 
Jo : Cant. 

W. BURGLBY. 
T. BUCKEHURST. 

Ro. Cecyll. 

' The original letter is in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 5 11 . 
' Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



A. D. 1592.] 459 

An Inventory of munition in the Pelicane of Flushing, the 3rd of May. 

Two whole cannons 

Two demy cannons 

Fower field carriages with shodd wheeles 

Two payre of wheeles for forecariages 

Five Ladles 

Five Spunges 

Therteene Barrells of Poweder doble casked 

Two spare Extrees 

Twelff Lanterns 

Twenty fower Coynes 

Great shott therteen hundred ^ 

Wherof three hundred cannon J 

Thirtye halfe pykes 

One wormer. 

In the Grace of God of Flushing 

One demy cannon 
Two whole Culverings 
Three field carriages 
Seaven payre of wheeles 
Five Ladles 
Sixe Spunges 
One Wormer 
Two Gunes furnished 
Seventy six shovells 
Fortie one Pickaxes 
Two dozen of basketts 
One barrell of taUowe 
One spare Extree 
Three forecariages 

In the French Barke of Diep called the Denay 

Seventy six barrells of powder 
Eight dozen spades and shovells 



460 [May, 



One and forty Crowes Iron 
Three and twenty spades 
Twenty fower Axes 
Forty fower Pickaxes 
Twenty nine headinge bills. 



CCXLIX. 

1592, 

24 May. " To the Lord Threasurer ; by John Symons the Poste, 

from Compeigne." * 

My very good Lord. Fame comonly caryeth the best and worste newes be- 
fore letters, wherfore I doe not doubt but your Lordship hath already ^ receaved 
the advertisements of the late unhappie accident and overthrowe given by the 
Duke Mercury to the Prince of Conty and D'Ombes, and the pursuite of his 
victory, which succeedeth as unhappely as the reste ; wherof, albeit your Lord- 
ship is sufficiently enformed out of Bryttany, yet am I bound in duty to wryte 
somewhat of the same, though not to mylikinge, beingelothe to be the messen- 
ger or confirmer of your Lordship's sorrowe, and lamentinge the accident my- 
selfe as much as any, for that it bringeth dishonor and danger to the cause, 
and discontentment to all such as are eyther favorers or well-wiUers ther unto. 
But victory and all things ells are in the hands of God, and the worlde is sub- 
jecte to alterations ; and nowe our best remedy is to creepe nearer to Gods 
mercies by prayer, Whom I beseech to direct all for the best, and will, when it 
seemeth good to Him. 

It is advertised the Kinge that the 13th day of this moneth, the princes of 

Conty and D'Ombes raised ther seege from Craon, understandinge of the ap- 

proches of the Duke Mercury towards them with his whole forces ; and enten- 

dinge to retire, (for that they were to weake to incounter the enemies,) they 

were soddenly surprised, so as for want of advertisements, of councell, and 

good resolution, they were defeated, makinge ther retraict without any resis- 

iThe original is in the State Paper Office; a draft in the Cottonian MS. fol. 388. 
2 Here commences the draft. 



A. D. 1592.] 461 

tance, beinge charged by the enemie bothe before and behinde them, they ha- 
vinge taken an unfitt straight passage to retyre with ther cannon and forces. 
The Englishe and Lansknights only came to blowes, who served with greate 
corage and resolution, and payed for it accordingly, beinge most of them 
slaine. The reste of the French did rune away at the firste and saved them- 
selves untill the Duke of Mercurye coastede them, and then overtakinge some 
of them in rowte killed many of them, but tooke the most parte prisoners. 
The copy of ther names I send your Lordship in a note herinclosed, I meane 
of the gentlemen of worthe, but of the nomber slajrne the Kinge hathe no cer- 
taine advertisement as yet. Of the artillerie they saved not one peece, ha- 
vinge seven cannons and fower demiculverins, without ever makinge shott 
with them. 

The Princes forces weere aboute 3,500 foote and 400 horse, and the enemie 
betweene 5,000 and 6,000 foote and 800 horse. The Duke Mercury hath ever 
sithence pursued his victory in somoninge and beseeginge townes, and hath ta- 
ken Chasteau Goutyer and La Val, which revolted voliuitary. They are bothe 
passags upon the river of Mayne, therfore of very great importance. He is 
nowe before Mayne, the cheife and capital! towne, as it is saied, and imagineth 
to take the tower by feare, without blowes. 

This unhappie accident dothe stricke a great feare and terror into all the 
harts of the Kings subjects in Britaigne and those parts adjoyninge, and 
therfore will hassard the losse of them and the townes and places ther, if they 
be not releived imediatly and better assured. It dothe also frustrate the 
Kinges former dissignes of blockinge Roan and Newhaven, and clearinge of 
Normandi, by takinge the places and townes ther. It dothe divert the Kinge 
from followinge the Duke of Parma, as before he intended, and therfore is for- 
ced to retourne to Vernon to take counsell for his best corse to succor Bri- 
taio-ne. It dothe anymate the Leagurs, and caused the Parisiens to receave 1,200 
Spaniards, ItaUans and Wallons into garrison in the towne ; and maketh in a 
manner ther recuel from peace. Lastley, it is likely to stay the Duke of Parma 
in Fraunce, who, as it is feared, will joyne with the Duke of Lorraine in Cham- 
peigne, who also hath almost 7&gt;000 foote and horse ther, and hathe lately 
taken Monte Clayre and other places ther ; and Champeigne is nowe in as 
greate danger as Brittaigne, so as the Kinge must nowe be forced to succor 
them bothe ; and in lieu of an offensive warr, to make a defenssive, wherin also 
he hath enough to do. 



462 [May, 

It pleased the Kinge imediately after the receipte of these advertisements to 
send for me and to imparte the same unto me at length, with extraordinary 
passion and discontentement. He discoursed att large of his misserable estate, 
of the factions of his servants and of ther ill dispositions, and then required my 
opinion touchinge his coxirse for Britaigne, as also what further ayd he might 
therin expect from her Majestie ; alleaginge that unlesse he were presently 
strengthenede fromEngland, it was impossible for hym to resist the greatenes of 
Spayne, who assailed his contrey by Britaigne, Languedoc, by the Lowe 
contreis, by the Duke of Savoy and Duke of Lorraigne ; and so ended his 
speech passionately. 

My answer was tempered with all myld speech and with the baste language 
I could use, humbly cravinge pardon for the delivery of my opinion as a publick 
minister; but not refiisinge as a private person, to deliver my conceipt by the 
way of discourse, not of advice ; which he so requiringe againe and well allow- 
inge, I did then begynne to sett oute the importance of the countrey of Britaigne, 
his want of provydince therin in time, his breach of promise in not sendinge 
forces thether, the Kinge of Spaine pretended tytle only to have that contrey, 
his meanes therby to ruyne Fraunce with most facilytie, and howe much therby 
his honor, proffitt and safftye might be specially impeached and indangered. 
I did then deliver all such reasons, arguments and matters as might urge the 
necessitye of his defence of that contrey ; wheruppon as grownds I layed my 
perswasions accordinge to my former instructions, and her Majesties directions, 
remembringe the ill disposition of his counsell, ther want of affectione to the 
conservation of Britaygne, and the divertinge of ther judgments more to ther 
private then to the publicke, wishinge such points of her Majesties demands 
might be qualifyed, which both he and they could not nor would not before 
disgest. Also wishinge him to directe such a corse as might carrye apparance 
and possibilytie for the preservinge therof, and norishinge his feare, which I 
thought was necessarye should remayne with him. Lastely, I did peremtorily 
presse his goinge presently in person with an army into Britaigne to resiste 
the enemies pursuite of victorye ; alleadginge, with good managinge of the matter 
in tyme, a good conclusion might followe, and it might the rather incorrage 
her Majestie to embrace once more the defence of that contrey, which was 
nowe altogether distressed with the untowardly proceedings ther ; and so con- 
cluded, neither gevinge any manner of comforte or discomforte of her Majesties 
resolution, and cravinge pardon for my bouldnesse and eamestnes, excusinge 



A. D, 1592.] 463 

the same with affection and passion I had to his service, the good of the 
cause, and the advancement of Gods glory, which first ought above all things 
to be regarded. 

To this the Kinge gave a willinge eare, and replyed with many thanks and 
without disalowinge of any thinge that I aUeadged, yealdinge many excuses of 
his wante of meanes, not of disposition, to provide a remedy, not forgettinge 
to acknowledge her Majesties care of hym and his contreye, and especially of 
Britaigne, and inclyninge much to my motion to goe in person thether, espe- 
cially by cause therby he might give her Majestie better satisfaction ; yet objec- 
tinge the stay of the Duke of Parma and the feare of his invasion of his 
frontiers, which were, as he saied, of greater consequence then Britaigne, but ap- 
prehendinge much the importance of Brittaigne, and protestinge that he would 
eyther 3rinediatly himselfe make warr in those partes or send an army 
thether under the conduct of one of his Mareshalls of Fraunce, and that he 
would presently send Marshall D'Aumont before with La Verdine, Monsr. 
Gaure, Montmartine, and 600 horse to gather other forces in Britaigne and 
the provinces adjojrninge, untill either himselfe or an army did follow them. 
In the meane season he saied he would take counsell, and then acquainte me with 
his resolution, and so concluded. 

I do not doubte but with good handlynge her Majestie may now obtayne 
any reasonable matter for the conservation of Bryttany, as also for a place of 
retraict for the Englishe, and I urdge contynually the yealdinge of the rest into 
her Majesties handes, wherunto I fynde the Kynge well inclynede, yff he 
myght brynge yt to passe. Also he begynneth to have some gellosye of the Go- 
vernor therof, which I seake to encrease by all meanes ; and yf the Kynge goe 
in person into Bryttany, his gellosye of the Governor and her Majesties instan- 
tinge the matter att this tyme may worke some good effect. I will not fayle 
to solicite yt to the uttermost, and to make my profytt of this tyme and 
occasion. 

Her Majesties letters for my revocation came to my hand as I was writinge 
this letter ; wheruppon I tooke occasion to repaire to the Kinge and to crave 
his leave to departe, which he very wiUingly graunted, requestinge me partly 
for my better safety, and cheifly for the understandinge of his further resolu- 
tion conceminge his affayres in Bryttaigne or elswher to attend him to Vernon, 
where within six dales he sheill meet with his counsell to take resolution ; so as 
I do for that purpose nowe expresslye attende him, hopinge to bringe over to 



464 [May, 

her Majestie his full resolution of his intents and of his affaires, and then im- 
ediately to retorne with all possible dilligence, and either to overtake this 
messenger, or to be at the corte within 3 daies after him ; humbly acknow- 
ledginge her Majesties most gratious favor in lycensinge my retoume, which 
dothe very much importe me. 

The Duke of Parma is himselfe in Chateau Tierry, and his army theraboutes, 
intendinge ther to passe the ryver of Mame. Two companies of his Carrabynes 
were lately defeated by some forces of the Kings in Brye, and the paisants 
have killed very many of the enemie in those partes and taken lately one of his 
peeces of artillery, which they have delevered unto the Governor. Therfore 
the Kinge saieth if this accident of Britaigne do not make stay of the Duke of 
Parma it is thought he will retoume into the Lowe Contreis to attende his 
cure, and to goe to the bathes. He is somewhat amended, and nowe in no 
danger, though not recovered. The Kinge attended his passage over the river, 
and lodged his army nere to Fere, and had not retoumed so soone but for 
this misfortune. 

The chauncellor of Navarre havinge the chardge committed to him of for- 
tefyinge Kylbeuf, hath lately refused to suffer Monsr. Le Grande to enter the 
towne, wherof the Kinge had given him the goverment. This breedeth a 
discontentment in the royalist Catholiques towardes them of the Religion, and 
may bring many inconveniences. The place is of very greate importance, and 
many are sorry that the Kinge hath placed a Catholique ther, and such a one 
as Monsr Le Grande, who doth not affect them of the Rehgion. 

Thus leavinge further to trouble your Lordship, and hopinge this shalbe 
my last letter and your last trouble of readinge my letters, I most humbly take 
my leave. 

From Compeigne, this 24th of May, 1592. 

Your Lordships wholly and ever 

to comand, 

Henry Unton. 
I humbly beseech your Lordship to have consi- 
deration of this bearrers paines, who have attended 
me all this journey and dothe hazard himselfe 
in his retourne, in respect of the very greate dan- 
ger of the passages. 



A. D. 1592.] 465 



CCL. 
1592, 

24 May. " From the Lord Threasurer ; receaved 

the 8th of June." » 

My lord Ambassador. This day at one instant by divers messengers I 
receaved your divers letters. The one of the 9th of ^ May, which seemed olde, 
an other of the 11th of May which was somewhat newer, and the last and 
freshest was of the 16th, but a sevennight olde, written at SenUs ; but what 
have happened since of the Kings pursuinge the Duke we cannott tell ; but 
that Captaine Harte, who brought your letters, reporteth that the Duke 
of Parma was gone out of Fraunce and the Kinge was retoumed into Picardie 
into St Valery. 

I did looke by your letters to have knowledge of your retouminge. Uppon 
the Queenes . . . = yowe, but I thinke theie weare not then come, and 
. . . looke by your next letters to have knowledge of your retoume. 

By a coppie of a letter which Sir Roger Williams sente unto you of the 
10th of May, I perceave that he complayneth greviously of one Civele, a 
comissaiye ; and besides complayneth of the misserable estate of our people, 
beinge harryed and wasted with continuall journeys, and not releived for 
victuaU, so as he and all our nation with him are utterly wearied with this 
kinde of service, as by his letter to you you may gather. And I doubt not but 
that you will acquainte the Kinge therwith, and procure some remedy and 
comforte, or otherwise our nation wilbe utterly discoraged to serve in that 
contrye at any tyme. 

If you be not come awaye from the Kinge at the arrivall of thes letters, you 
may do well to insynuate these things unto the Kinge in modeste and good 
manner. And so expectinge some more freshe newes from you, and specially 
touchinge the matter of the peace, I forbeare to write any more att this tyme, 
wishinge you a saflFe and good retome. 

* The original letter is contained in the same volume, fol. 505. 
' Here is the beginning of the original. 

GOO 



466 [May, 

From the Court, this 24 of May, 1592. 

Your very lovinge freind, 

W. BURGLEY. 

Postcript. 1 

Presently I heare of a greate defeate given to the 
2 princes by the cowardnes of the Lieutenants; 
wherof our nation hath, I feare, suffered greate 
wracke ; such are the accidents of warrs. 



CCLI. 

1592, 

29 May. " From the Lord Threasurer ; by Romano, receaved 
the 11th of June, at Diepe."'^ 

My lord Ambassador. The uncertenty to us wher you are, or where the ^ 
Frenche Kinge is, or what is become of the Duke of Parma, hould us in 
suspence what to thincke or to write. The evill newes of Britaigne maketh us 
so perplexed as we canott take comforte of any hard accident to the Duke of 
Parma. The Queenes Majestic sendeth Sir H. Norris with armor, powder and 
munition to Caen, with some nombers (thoughe fewe) of freshe souldiers, to 
comforte our band ther wasted, thoughe we know not well wherfore. I had 
rather bothe Paris and Roan were left unrecovered then have Brittaigne loste. 
We never heard from you since you wrot that the Kinge was gone to 
Compeigne, nether heare we what Marshall Biron dothe at St Valery or 
Newchastell. This northen wynde stay aU inteUigenses. Yesterday was 
appointed sergeant Puckeringe to be Lord Keeper, Mr. Attorney to be Cheefe 
Justice of the Kings Benche, Mr. Solicitor to be Attoumey Generall, and 
(I thincke) Mr. Cook, Recorder of London, shalbe Solicitor. 29th May, 1592. 

Your Lordships assuredly, 

W. BURGHLEY. 

1 The whole of this postcript is in Lord Burgley's writing, 

2 The original all in Burghley's hand is contained in the Cottonian MS. fol. 507. 
' Here begins the Cottoniau original. 



A. D. 1592.] 467 



CCLII. 

1592, 

6 June. " From my lord Threasurer ; receaved by Charles Jasper, 

the 12th of June." 1 

My lord Ambassador. Althoughe we doe heare howerly expect eyther your 
anyvall or your cominge hether, and the rather at this tyme as '^ the winde doth 
serve, yett havinge the commodity offered to me by the French Ambassador 
heare sendinge into Fraunce, I could not forbeare to wryte a fewe lines unto 
you with this, meaninge to indorse the letters to yourselfe as Ambassador, or 
in your absence, beinge come from thence, to Mr. Edmonds, your secretary, 
wherby you may understand from hence wheruppon we do depend. 

Your last letters are of the 24th May from Compeigne, wherin you did 
advertise the hard newes of Britaigne, which were before brought over hither 
to us in generall tearmes ; of the victory gotten by the Duke Mercury and the 
losse of the two princes, and therwith, in a generaUyty, certified greate losse of 
ours ; which since that tyme we understand to be trewe, not so much in 
nombers as in our chieflans and officers of the bands. 

Since the receipt of your letters the French Ambassador hear hath brought 
letters to her Majestic from the E[inge and to himselfe also, dated at 
Compeigne, as yours were ; wherby the Kinge hath certefied in a doubtfuU sort 
this losse in Britaigne, affirminge he had no knowledge further therof then of 
a letter of the wife of Laverdine written to her husband ; by which it apperethe 
as also by yours, that the Kinge ment to leave the prosecutinge of the Duke of 
Parma and to come into Normandi, and to consulte aboute the matters of 
Brittaigne wherunto he hath sent the Marshall of D'Aumont and diverse 
others to make head against the enemie, and to followe himselfe in persone 
with an army, as he shall have advise of his counsell at Vernon. And it 
seemeth by the French Ambassador, from thence the Kinge myndeth to 
sende some speciall personne to her Majestic with this resolution. 

Her Majestie hath sent into Brittaigne to understand the state of her people, 
and hathe sent bothe armes and money to releive them. And unlesse she 

' The original is found in the Cottonian MS. Calig. E. viii. fol. 509. 
' Here begins the Cottonian MS. 



468 [June, 

shall understand of ther estate and of the Kings resolution, she forbeareth to 
determayne any thinge heare conceminge the matter. And trewly her Majestic 
hath great cause to sticke uppon her former demands to have some porte 
towne for her retraict for her people ; and specially captaines will be hardly 
drawen to leave ther contrye heare. And I wishe the French Kinge might 
rightley conceave. More I have not at this tyme to write unto you, consider- 
inge the dayly expectation of the accesse of you the Ambassador. ^ Her Majestic 
receaved in secret sorte your letters sent unto Mr. Wilkes, who beinge at the 
Bathes, sent them to her Majestic, which she would have answered but that 
she expected your dayly cominge. From the Corte, the 6th of Jime, 1592. 

Your Lordships most assuredly, 

W. BURGHLEY. 



CCLIII. 

1592, 

12 June. « To Sir Robert CeciU ; by John Le Roy. " « 

Your letters of the . . . which was sent with my revocation, I receaved 
yesterday, as also the letter of my revocation ; but the coppy of her Majesties 
letter I hadd sent me longe before. To give your Honor dewe thancks is but 
to singe * an olde songe ; in a worde, this I will say that Ingratum dixeris 
et omnia dixeris ; which I protest your Honor nor any creature shall finde in 
mee. Wherof I beseech you, so conceave and beleive of me and command me 
accordingly, in whom you have all interest and dewe right. 

Yt pleaseth you in your letter to honor me with the offer and assurance of 
your freindly faith and familiarity, and in sorte to make some doubte of myne, 
by reason of report made to your Honor of my credulitie and geolosie con- 
ceaved of your favor. If I should not hould myselfc to be prowde of your 
favor, I should greatly injurye your worthe and my owne good. I know the 

' From this point to the end, all is Lord Burghley's writing. 
" The draft of this letter is in the Cottonian MS. fol. 391 . 
' Here begins the Cottonian draft. 



A. D, 1592.] 469 

place you worthelye possesse and your favorable vertues. And if I be not 
1 wishe, yet I am not so folishe as not to make dewe account therof, and to 
acknowledge my happines therin. For the reporte of my credulitie and 
jealosye ; — it may be an imperfection in mee, yet did never freinde of myne 
heretofore accuse me therof. What reason your Honor hath to doe I know 
not, nor may I not dispute with you, as heretofore I might have done when 
our fortunes were not so fare unequal. Before your Honor had power over 
me by affection, nowe also by authoritie. Howe ever it be, this muche I 
protest, that untiU you rejecte me I will never leave to honor and love you, and 
so to doe you service. I may not deny but some have sought to stirr in mee 
some other conceipts of your Honor, and have tolde me many frivolus tales, 
which they could never yet make me beleeve and which I intended at my 
retome to presume to imparte unto you. I have had to great arguments 
of your favor to remaine in doubt of you ; and I humbly beseech you to assure 
yourselfe of my trewe devotion. 

I could not be quiet untill I did answer your Honors letters, albeit I 
will better justifie my selfe att my retoume which shalbe vrith all possible 
speed. In the meane season I crave of your Honor to beleeve I am prowde 
of your favor, and constant and good opinion of mee, which I will ever honestly 
deserve. And so hastinge and longinge that this letter may make my purga- 
tion under myne owne hand, I humbly take my leave. 

From Diepe, the 12th of June, 1592. 

Your Honors ever to command, 

Henry Unton. 



CCLIV. 



1592, 

12 June. " To my lord Threasurerj by John Le Roy." ^ 

My very good Lord. The Kinge his resolution taken so lately at Gysors 

1 Such is the reading of the Bodleian transcript ; the original letter is here destroyed by fire. We 
should probably read, " And if I be not wise." 
s The draft of this letter is in the Cottonian MS. fol. 390 ; the original is in the State Paper Office. 



470 [June, 

wher his counsell assembled, and his present sendinge Monsr. de Saney in 
ambassage to her Majestic, requestinge me to accompany him, hath beene the 
cause of my so longe staye, contrary to my desyre and your Lordship's exspec- 
tation. We bothe arryved here yesterday, and intende to imbarke tomorrowe, 
if the wynde suffer us ; for it importeth her Majesties service and the Kings 
to use all possible dilligence. We had our dispatch the 10th, and by this 
my stay I hope to make a better reporte of all matters to her Majesties satis- 
faction ; untiU then I forbeare to write either of this gentlemans negociation or 
of the Bangs intents, proceedings or resolution, which cheifly depend uppon 
her Majesties directions and allowance ; and therfore he is to make the more 
haste in his jorney and retoume. 

This gentleman is as well knowen to your Lordship as to mee ; only this I 
will say, he is well affected in reUigion and to the common cause, and this his 
imployment may much advance her Majesties service. He hath never ben in 
England. And I crave to knowe your Lordships pleasure whether I shall ac- 
company him to London, or leave him by the way and hasten to the courte. It 
importeth much that I have accesse to her Majestic and your Lordship, and 
make some report of matters of waighte to be considered of before he receive 
his audience, which he wiU greately presse at his arrivall in respect of his hast 
to retomc. This I leave to your Lordships dewe consideration, cravingc direc- 
tion accordingly from your Lordship at my arrivall, which shalbe with all speed 
att Dover. 

Your Lordships letters of the 24th of May I receaved at Gysors the day 
before my departure, where I performed towards the Kinge so much as your 
Lordship required, and ther left my secretary Edmondes to attend the Kinge 
who is nowe at St. Dennis with aU his counsell and his army, intendinge to 
make a forte upon the river of Marne to brydle Paris, and in the meane 
season to take resolution of all his affaires. Your Lordships last letter of the 
6th of this moneth I receaved this morninge, which I have sent to my Se- 
cretary. 

The Reyters and Lanseknights do retomc into Germany and wiU not be 
longer stayed. The Englishe have obtayned leave of the Kinge by my 
meanes for 20 dayes to retomc and refreshe themselves hearc aboute Deip in 
the contrey, wher they wilbeto morrowe. And the Nethcrlanders do retomc 
with them, for the same purpose, and duringe the same tyme. Of them both 
I thincke they are in nomber 900, so as they have need of refreshinge. And 
the States doe utterly refuse to send the 2,000 which her Majestic lately 



A. D. 1592.] 471 

required. This is all I will trouble your Lordship with at this tyme, de- 
ferringe the rest untill my retorne. And so I most humbly take my leave. 
From Diepe, this 12th June, 1592. 

Your Lordship's wholly to command, 

Henry Unton. 

I doe not perceave by your Lordship's letters of your receipt of one of myne 
of the fyrst of June, wherin I did wryte to your Lordship by a trusty French 
man att lardge of the matter of peace and other advertisements of greate im- 
portance, in cyphere. This bearer also hath attended on this last jomy, of 
whome I beseeche your Lordship to consider. 

I have not receaved any such letters, W. B. ' 



CCLV. 

1592, 

1 7 June. " The perticular chardges of transportation and other ordinary 
chardges in retorninge home to the Corte, 
the 17th of June 1592." 

£. s. d. 
Imprimis, for my transportation with servants and myselfe 
from Fere to Tartenoyes to Deip, beinge 60 leagues . . . 60 
For charges of 120 horse, which went with me for convoy, and 

reward of them 60 

For transportation from Diep to Dover of myselfe and 22 

servants 20 

For transportation of my stuffe, horses and 16 servants from 

Diep to London 50 

For 23 post horses from Dover to London . . . . 11 10 

Sum total £201 10 
' This memorandum by Burghley is found on both the original and the copy. 



472 

The first bill for intelligence moneyes. 

It may please your Lordship ; I have sent a bill for such monies as have 
beene disbursed by me in especiall and necessary causes of her Majesties 
service, amountinge to the somme of £185, which I humbly beseech your 
Lordship to subscribe. In like manner I have layed out for conveyance of 
letters for her Highnesse espiaU causes, the some also underwritten, which 
are inclosed in the same bill. 

£. s. d. 
20th December 1591, For espiall and intelligences . . . 200 
For sendinge letters in August at several! 
tymes to Noyon to the French Kinge and 
Grymston, by her Majesties speciall order 

and your Lordships 20 

For sendinge of letters in September and 
October to her Majestic and your Lordship, 
for her speciall service . . . . 20 
Sum of the totall by me disbursed 
from 23 of July untill the 20 of De- 
cember then next followinge, amounteth 
to the some of 240 

For espyall money and intelligences, and 
for sendinge of letters in Aprill, May and 
June, for her Majesties service . . 160 

More for so much moneyes by me dis- 
bursed for 3 moneths, as namely January, 
February and March . . . . 100 

Some £260 



LONDON : 

FROM aribe ^Jjaft^peare pe^^, by 

WILLIAM NICOL, 

60, PALL MALL. 

1847. 

  </body>
</html>
    